a life like mine how children live around the world 


survival every child should have water
how much water is there
watery tales
nou
every child should have food
why do we need food
what's cooking
vincent
every child should have a home
where do people live
a place to live
mahasin nadin every child deserves a healthy life
what do you need to stay healthy
health for life
natalie
development every child has the right to education
why do we need an education
school for all
sbongile
maria
every child has the right to play
what's the point of playing
just playing
michael

protection
every child needs love and care
who loves and cares for you
family feelings
ivana
no child should be exploited through work
why do children work
hard work
arif
no child should fight in a war
what happens in a war
war and recovery
isa
no child should be held back by a disability
what is life like with a disability
living with a disability

participation
every child has the right to an identity
who are you
what's in a name
nationality
najaha and abdisukri
religion
eli
every child has the right to free expression
express yourself
freedom of expression
taralyn
every child deserves a happy life
sibasish
mayerly
index and acknowledgments

Introduction

Where do they live
United States Colombia Netherlands Kosovo
Sierra Leone
Israel and Occupied Palestinian Territory
Sudan Rwanda South Africa
Australia Laos Bangladesh

India
Afghanistan 

in this book you will meet children from around the world. 
although they seem very different they all share one goal they want to lead a good life. 
in the following pages you'll learn about their lives thoughts and hopes for the future
Taralyn Taralyn is years old. she lives near Seattle, Washington. Meet Taralyn on page is years 
old. He lives in Atlanta Georgia. Meet on page Mayerly Mayerly is. She lives in Bogota Colombia. 
Meet her on page 

Natalie
Natalie is nine years old. She lives in Bedfordshire England. Meet her on page Isa Isa is years 
old. He lives in Sierra Leone. Meet him on page

Najaha Abdisukri
Najaha is and Abdisukri is nine. They live in Tilburg Netherlands. Meet them on page Ivana
Ivana is years old. She lives in Pristina Kosovo. Meet her on page
Eli Eli is. He lives at Yemin Orde Youth Village in Israel. Meet him on page. Nadin
Nadin is. She lives in Kalandia camp in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Meet her on page
Maria
Maria is nine. She lives in Kabul Afghanistan. Meet her on page
Nou Nou is nine. She lives in Ponsavanh in Laos. Meet her on page Michael Michael is six. 
He lives on Lake Torrens Station in Australia. Meet him on page
Arif Arif is. He lives in Dhaka Bangladesh. Meet him on page

Sibasish Sibasish is years old. He lives in Kolkata India. Meet him one page
Vincent Vincent is years old. He lives in Rwanda. Meet him on page Sbongile

Sbongile is years old. She lives in Cape Town South Africa. Meet her on page Mahasin

Mahasin is nine years old. She lives in Tambisco Sudan. Meet her on page

Children around the world world map
There are over six billion people in the world. More than two billion of them are under 
More than million children of ages work. More than half of those are involved in dangerous work 
or work full-time
Nearly million children under five die each year mostly from preventable diseases

Survival Survival Survival Survival noun to survive verb to remain alive to continue to live 
to continue to function or manage in spite of some adverse circumstance or hardship hold up 
endure

Every child should have water that is safe to drink close to their home

Every child should have enough nourishing food to eat so they can grow and thrive
Home should be a place where every child can feel comfortable and safe
Every child should have access to health care in order to lead a full and active life

Survival Water
Every child should have water
Bathing ceremony drinking growing food swimming playing The water of life
Without water there would be no life on Earth Water is our planet's most precious possession 
A human being can survive only a few days without water We use water in so many different ways 
without even thinking about it Some of us just turn the faucet on and water gushes out But not 
everybody in the world can take water for granted

Survival Water How much water is there Imagine waking up tomorrow to find that there were no 
faucets What would you do Like many people in the world you would have to get the water you needed 
from a river lake well pump or communal faucet more than of the world is covered in water

Water keeps us alive We use it to drink to grow food and to bathe It's also essential for building 
houses and running factories About percent of the world's water is salty and seawater cannot be 
used Most of the freshwater in the world is too difficult to reach because it's underground or in 
icebergs Only percent of the Earth's freshwater is available but that's still plenty for our needs
More than of the world is covered in water
How much water do you use In some countries you would have to manage with just one bucketful of 
water for the whole day That means water for drinking bathing and cooking 
If you leave the faucet running twice a day when you brush your teeth you use this much water 
That's a whole day's supply for some people Three visits to the bathroom flushes this much water 
down the drain Keeping clean requires water This much water fills a bathtub gallons liters
Washing machines guzzle all this water for one load of laundry Factories need to use a lot of 
water It took this amount of water to make the shoes you are wearing We can't drink seawater 
because it's too salty Even the percent of freshwater available on our planet is sometimes unsafe 
to drink So is there enough water for everyone Yes but there are still problems
Too little rain Enough rainwater falls every day to cover the land in a layer cm deep That 
should be plenty for everyone The problem is that more rain falls in some areas than in others
Bad water Every day people die because the water they use contains dangerous chemicals or 
untreated sewage Diarrhea caused by dirty water and dirty conditions kills more than million 
children a year Too much rain Many fertile parts of the world are prone to flooding Floods 
destroy people's homes and often cause the water supply to become dirty This makes it easy for 
diseases to spread Dry deserts Percent of the world's surface is desert and the desert is growing 
all the time Deserts have little or no rainfall People have to walk miles to get water for 
themselves their animals and their crops Water factsBelieve it or not percent of you 
is water You would probably die after three days without water Water makes up percent of your 
bones

Survival
Water
Watery Tales These children are lucky to have access to clean safe running water Yet most of them 
have to get it daily for their families a difficult and time-consuming task
This village in Afghanistan was bombed during a war in the Even in it had still not been rebuilt
Afghanistan Two boys get water from a hand pump Villages in this region are affected by drought so 
these pumps are a lifeline 
Local people have received hygiene education and have been trained in maintaining the hand pumps
A bucket to carry the water home India Two girls carry containers to a communal water source 
They will fill them up with water and then take them home The girls use as many containers as they 
can for each trip and carry the biggest pots on their heads and the other containers in their 
hands Their heads are cushioned from the metal pots by a piece of cloth
A gallon liter bucket of water weighs lb kg that's very heavy In fact it's about the same 
weight as a one year old child The Netherlands Najaha helps herself to a glass of water from the 
faucet in her kitchen She's the only person on this page who doesn't have to leave her house to 
get water How many faucets and sinks are there in your home How would your life change if 
there were only one faucet in your home What if you had to collect water from outside your home 
Or from a few streets away Jamaica A girl fills a bucket with water from a community standpipe 
The standpipe is not as convenient as having a faucet in your house but it's better than having to 
get water from a river or a lake When people come to collect their water they also share news and 
gossip Before it reaches the standpipe the water is pumped out of the ground Then it must be 
treated to remove dirt and germs so it will be safe to drink Otherwise it is no safer than river 
water Water gushes out 

Survival Water
Nou Two years ago a pump was installed in Nou's village in Laos Previously people collected water 
from a stream It was not safe and often made them sick
Myanmar Viet Nam China Laos Thailand Cambodia Laos Mountainous and full of forests Laos has a 
monsoon climate This means both droughts and floods occur depending on the season
Before the pump A nearby stream provided all the water for Nou's village The water was not safe 
but it was all the villagers had For three months of the year the stream dried up People dug into 
the streambed for water but it was always muddy Now that there is safe water to drink people have 
stopped getting sick and can spend less time and money on visits to the doctor 
Getting water Children in Laos get water for their families Nou and her friends used to make many 
trips to the stream sometimes missing school I had my own buckets which were smaller than the 
ones my older sister used More time Now that the pump is in the center of the village everyone has 
more time than before Nou to play and her mother to help in the fields
We can get water so easily I can go and bring back a fresh bucket whenever I want
School garden
The village has a new feature now A garden was impractical before because it was too far to go to 
get water for the plants That is not a problem now because the village pump is actually in the 
school yard We have a school garden with flowers in it We water it every day
The trip The walk to get water included a steep hill and a rickety bridge It took minutes to get 
there but minutes returning with heavy buckets I used to get water from the stream twice a day I 
would walk with my friends We could talk while we went even though the buckets were heavy
Laundry People still use the river to do laundry but going to the bathroom is simpler and more 
hygienic thanks to a new covered toilet built by Nou's father and brother
The roof and walls of our bathroom are made of leaves and thatch and it's not far from the house
Life is better now Survival Food Every child should have food Survival growth good health strength 
energy feasting Food is our fuel We eat in order to survive We enjoy the tastes smells and 
textures of food Most celebrations and holidays involve eating together While people in rich parts 
of the world are dying from diseases caused by overeating many in poorer parts of the world are 
struggling to get enough food to survive

Survival Food Why do we need food Every day of people in the world go to bed hungry
Have you ever tried to study or play when you were hungry When children don't get enough food they 
don't have the energy to work play or learn Their bodies and brains don't grow as well as they 
should and they are more likely to suffer from diseases Malnutrition means not getting enough of 
the food you need Every year millions of children die from diseases made worse by malnutrition
When there is a shortage of food some parents in some countries will feed their sons better than 
their daughters resulting in worse malnutrition among girls
Proteins Vitamins and minerals Carbohydrates Sugars and fats What happens when we do not eat a 
balanced diet One child in four does not get enough protein or calories Each child is sick for 
many days each year Filling foods like rice noodles bread and cereals are called carbohydrates 
Without them children have no energy to get through the day One person in two does not get enough 
vitamins and minerals This weakens the body's resistance to disease Foods containing sugars and 
fats can taste really good But too much can make us overweight and unhealthy Eat good food Stay 
healthy and happy Why do people go hungry Environmental problems such as drought floods and 
deforestation destroy the soil making it hard to grow food Problems get worse when people farm 
land with damaged soil War forces people away from their homes and off their land so it's hard to 
plant crops and distribute food that is grown During war governments spend money on weapons 
instead of food Overgrazing by animals damages the land and the soil so crops cannot grow 
Overfishing affects not just the number of fish in the ocean but other animals and plants in the 
food chain Some people don't have money to buy all the food they need or enough land and tools 
to grow it themselves As food becomes less available the price goes up even more Many poor 
people have to spend almost all of their money on food leaving very little left over for other 
necessities A good idea Why can't we just send hungry people our extra food It would stop people 
from dying but it wouldn't solve the reasons why hunger happens Governments need to make sure 
that everyone has a way to grow or buy the food they need

Survival Food What's cooking A staple food is the one that our meals are based around Whether it's 
bread, rice, noodles, or potatoes, when we see or smell it we know we won't be hungry for long
England Some people like to have a big Sunday lunch. A traditional main course for this meal might 
consist of roast beef, roast potatoes, Yorkshire pudding, vegetables, and gravy
This meal is eaten at a table using knives and forks. English people often chat during a big meal
Viet Nam There are lots of rivers and lakes in Southeast Asia so people eat plenty of fish
In Asia most meals contain either rice or noodles. Vietnamese people eat food from a bowl using 
chopsticks Bangladesh Typical flavorings for food include salt, coriander, turmeric, cumin, 
chili powder, garlic, onions, and chilies In Bangladesh people eat using only their right hand. 
People don't talk much while they eat
Mozambique Fufu is the focus of most meals in Mozambique. Making fufu is always energetic work. 
You have to boil the grains then pound them hard and stir it till you get a smooth paste
Fufu can be made of corn, sweet potato, or plantain a kind of savory banana. Elsewhere in Africa 
it is sometimes called sadza or ugali Grains of corn actual size Survival Food Vincent 
Fifteen-year-old Vincent lives in Rwanda. His mother and father are dead so Vincent takes care of 
his younger sister and brother. He does many of the household chores including growing and buying 
the food that the family eats Rwanda Rwanda's temperate climate is good for farming. 
Most people eat what they grow though some grow tea coffee and other crops to sell
Rwanda Congo Uganda Tanzania Burundi Preparing lunch Donata Uwamahoro Vincent's year-old sister is 
responsible for cooking the midday meal while Vincent is at school My older brother is. He lives 
nearby with a family of his own Vegetable Patch Vincent's brother helps him weed the cabbage 
patch. A local organization gave Vincent advice about growing vegetables so he also grows tomatoes 
and sweet potatoes We used to earn a little from our coffee bushes but they have stopped 
producing beans. I make money from doing odd jobs now All fired up Vincent's sister does most of 
the cooking but her brothers help her light the fire We have one meal a day. I eat at school the 
others eat at home Bananas and goats Vincent grows bananas on his land. He also keeps some goats 
in an enclosure. They provide manure for the crops I get up when it is light. I don't have a 
watch. My first task is to cut some grass to feed to our goats Working with wood Vincent takes 
carpentry lessons at a day center for orphans run by a local organization I wish to become a 
carpenter so that I can earn a living by making beds and other furniture Survival Home
Every child should have a home Warm, cool, dry, safe, shelter, privacy, space, comfort, peace
Home sweet home Our homes protect us from the weather. At home we feel safe comfortable and 
relaxed. A home can be built anywhere and out of anything. Around the world, people live in all 
kinds of homes including houses apartments campers caves houseboats treehouses and tents Survival
Home Where do people live A home is more than a building. It is a place where you can be secure, 
safe, healthy, and happy It doesn't matter what a house looks like but to be a good home for 
children a house needs to provide Protection from the weather injury smoke and pollution 
A safe water supply in the house or nearby Sturdy walls that cannot catch fire easily
Sanitary ways to get rid of human waste and garbage Safe food storage and preparation
Enough room for everyone living there Adults who can care for children There is not enough 
affordable housing so some people have to live in bad conditions Nearly half of the world's 
population lives in cities Million people in cities do not have safe piped water Million people 
in cities have no toilet or latrine At least million people live in city slums or shantytowns 
A third of all city dwellers live in substandard housing That means the poorest families have 
nowhere to bathe. Many have to buy water from expensive water sellers
Many families have to share a bathroom. They face a bleak future exposed to conditions that 
breed disease Billion people have inadequate housing More than million families in the world's 
cities are homeless Not everyone is homeless for the same reason. There are many causes of 
homelessness War and violence forces people out of their homes. Over half of the world's 
refugees are children. Some children run away from home because of violence When there is no 
work people leave the country and move to the cities. This makes the cities very crowded and 
housing there is even more expensive
Natural disasters such as droughts floods volcanos and storms can destroy homes. After a disaster 
there might not be any money to rebuild houses
There is not enough cheap housing for all the people who need it. The unemployed or those earning 
very little sometimes end up on the streets There are lots of different kinds of houses
In the hot deserts of Tunisia some people live in underground houses where it is cool
On the rivers of Hong Kong and Thailand, people sometimes live on riverboats Survival Home
A place to live Homes differ enormously around the world. There are city homes and country homes, 
homes in hot climates and in cold climates, homes on or near water and homes on or near mountains. 
What makes a home a home The people who live in it
Turkey Our earliest ancestors probably found shelter from the sun wind and rain in caves. 
Today some people still choose to live in a cave or to use a cave as the basis for their houses. 
This home is built into the side of a cave. The thick walls help keep the home cool in summer and 
warm in winter The most convenient thing about a cave dwelling is that you don't have to build your 
home from scratch because the cave is already there.
China A family sits in their wooden houseboat moored in the shallows near a fishing village in 
Fujian province. Living on the river is practical both for fishing and for selling the fish you 
catch so it's often fisherman and their families who live in homes like these
When you live on a houseboat you get used to the slight rocking motion of the water and the 
cramped conditions. Children brought up on a houseboat learn to swim and to behave responsibly 
around the water from an early age
Laos People in Laos weave panels out of rattan A kind of grass. It only takes one day for the 
panels to be lashed together to form a house. However the panels do need to be replaced regularly
In the rainy season it can get very muddy. That's why this house is built on stilts. The area on 
the right is a pen where the family keeps their pigs. The pigs don't mind the mud
England family works in a traveling circus in England. They are on the road for most of the year. 
They live in this trailer which they bought in the. It is very comfortable and has a washing 
machine and a microwave. The children of people who travel go to many different schools. 
They keep a record book that they take to each school.
Rwanda Vincent lives here with his two sisters and his brother. 
Their two room house is made of sunbaked mud brick. Vincent and his family built their own house 
with help from their neighbors and friends who pitched in to make bricks and construct the house
When there is no money for expensive building materials, people use whatever materials are 
available. Thick mud bricks are practical in hot dry climates because they keep the house cool
Survival Home Sudan Egypt Chad Eritrea Ethiopia South Sudan Central African Republic Congo 
Uganda Kenya Sudan Until it split into two countries Sudan and South Sudan in Sudan was Africa's 
biggest country. Its landscape is mainly desert but a great swamp lies on its southern border
Mahasin Nomadic cattle herders like Mahasin and her family don't live in one place but move about 
to find fresh grass for their cattle. They use the milk from their cows to make butter 
which they sell. Moving around is an adventure and Mahasin loves her way of life Moveable home
The family's home is made out of twigs and sticks woven together. Twice a year when the community 
migrates the hut is taken apart and the materials transported on camels and oxen so it can be 
rebuilt in a new location Me my mother and my sisters sleep in the family hut. 
The men in the family sleep in an open hut where they can keep an eye on the cattle
Nomadic life Mahasin's family moves frequently in order to find grass and water for their cattle. 
All of Mahasin's personal belongings need to fit into one small trunk The thing I like best in 
life is when we move. Wherever we go with our cattle, people treat us with respect and often help 
us. We can go everywhere we want. Traveling school Mahasin attends a special school for nomadic 
children. There are about children at the school but students change all the time because of 
constant migrations We learn the Arabic language religion and geography. Our teacher's name is 
Fadul Osman. He always travels with us. He is one of us. Staple food Mahasin likes to help her 
mother and sisters with the cooking and cleaning. The family's staple food is called asida. 
It is a dish of vegetables and grains mixed with spices. Mahasin helps her mother to do the dishes.
Basket weaving When Mahasin is not studying she helps her family to take care of their cattle and 
weaves baskets for the family to use Mahasin's necklace is called a khannakh
A desert hopping game Mahasin and her friends play a traditional game called arikkia
Survival Home Gaza West bank Jordan Egypt Israel Occupied Palestinian territory 
The occupied Palestinian territory is in two separate parts the West Bank and Gaza. 
Israel occupied the land during the war
Nadin Nadin and her family live in a refugee camp in the West Bank run by the United Nations. 
Her family fled from their original town of Malha historical Palastine after the Arab-Israeli war 
A family home Nadin her parents two sisters and a brother all live on just the lower floor of the
house. Nadin's grandparents aunt uncle and their children all live on the upper floor
My family has been living in the camp for more than years since it was set up in. My grandmother 
was six when she moved here from the town of Malha At play There are few places in the camp for 
girls to play so Nadin plays either indoors or on the street in front of the house
Family ties Nadin is very close to everyone in her family. Because she is the eldest she helps her 
mother take care of her younger sister Hala who is only two years old
We eat a popular Palestinian dish called musakhan. It is made of bread onion chicken and spices 
all fried up together musakhan
Olives Not so different Palestinian food is similar to that of other countries in the region 
including Jordan Israel Turkey Greece Iran and Iraq. My biggest wish is to go back to Malha our 
original city. I also wish for peace between Israelis and Palestinians
Time for bed Nadin shares her bedroom with eight-year-old Wafa. The rest of the family sleeps in 
the family room I love my sister Wafa though we argue a lot because she is very talkative. 
She wants to be famous and appear on TV 
Nadin and her sister Wafa and brother Mohammed Helping at home After she gets home from school 
Nadin helps her mother with chores such as sweeping the floor and dusting the furniture

Survival Health Every child deserves a healthy life Strong bones healthy teeth fitness hygiene 
immunization Staying well It's best not to get sick in the first place. Vaccinations can protect 
us against some diseases. Good hygiene and a healthy diet can help us avoid others. But sometimes 
people get sick. When that happens they may need the help of Doctors medicine and hospitals to get 
well again

Survival Health What do you need to stay healthy Good health is the most precious thing you have
To stay healthy you need good food and safe water somewhere to bathe yourself a place to go to the 
bathroom vaccines healthcare and a way to dispose of your garbage safely
When you get sick you need to be able to see someone such as a doctor or a nurse or a healthcare 
worker who can help you get better
Clean water Healthy diet Sanitation Doctors Vaccines Healthy child More than a billion people have 
no access to medical care. If you get sick how long do you have to wait to see a doctor
Measles kills one child every minute. You were probably immunized against the disease. 
In Africa percent were not You were probably immunized against a number of easily preventable 
childhood diseases. Sadly million children are not In Afghanistan most people have no access to a 
doctor or nurse. In Italy most people do In China the government trains people in remote villages 
to administer basic medical care. They're called barefoot doctors Children die from many diseases. 
Children under the age of five die each day. Malnutrition is what kills them. 
Some of the world's deadliest illnesses can be easily and cheaply prevented Malaria is caused by 
mosquitos it affects up to million people each year yet it can be prevented by sleeping under a 
mosquito net and by getting rid of mosquito breeding areas Malnutrition affects million children 
it leaves them weak and unable to fight disease Malnutrition can be prevented by having enough 
healthy food to eat and basic health care Diarrhea causes dehydration which kills more than 
million children A year it can be avoided by access to clean food and water a person can be cured 
with an packet of rehydration salts Measles rarely kills healthy children however in developing 
countries it kills nearly million children each year it can be prevented with the vaccine that 
costs per dose The tragedy of AIDS In sub-Saharan Africa millions of children have been 
orphaned by AIDS. Many more are having their education disrupted because their teachers are 
dying of the disease

Survival Health Health for life Healthcare is vital in the early years when children are growing 
fast and are exposed to a lot of diseases. Healthy children have a much better chance of growing up 
to be healthy adults. AngolaA girl with a respiratory infection is examined by a doctor 
in a hospital in Luanda the capital. Finally after years of fighting in Angola the government 
assisted by UNICEF is able to improve basic education and health care. All children need regular 
health checkups just to make sure that everything is all right and no problems are developing
India A girl smiles as she carries a clay jug of water to her home in Tamil Nadu. 
Sadly dirty drinking water is responsible for many preventable deaths especially in babies and 
young children Pots like these keep water fresh and cool. However a safe supply of tap water would 
be much more convenient for everyone. China A girl takes a polio vaccine at a UNICEF assisted 
clinic. By vaccinating as many children as possible the world health organization UNICEF and 
other partners hope to have freed the world from polio by. The polio vaccine is quick and easy to 
take. The child just swallows the medicine. However to be totally effective you need to take it on 
four separate occasions. Bangladesh This two-year-old girl has plenty to smile about as she 
splashes clean bath water. The bath water in her plastic basin came from a new hand pump 
Using a river or lake for bathing or for going to the bathroom makes the water unsafe for drinking
Zambia Fruits and vegetables are rich in vitamins and minerals that help us recover from diseases 
and even prevent us from getting sick in the first place. Different foods contain different 
nutrients so it's important to have a balanced diet Our bodies cannot store most vitamins so in 
order to stay healthy we need to eat fresh foods every day Survival Health Scotland UK England
Ireland Wales France United kingdom Factories and traffic in developed countries such as the UK 
tend to create pollution. This can cause health problems such as asthma which affects one in eight 
children in the UK Natalie Natalie suffers from eczema and from asthma A condition affecting the 
tubes that carry air in and out of her lungs. There is no cure but fortunately Natalie is able to 
manage her condition and leads a very active life Eczema Many asthmatics suffer from a skin 
condition called eczema. Natalie has to be careful what her skin comes into contact with. 
Some things make it break into sores Eczema cream I have to moisturize my skin morning and 
evening. The hot weather makes my skin itchy. Once I start scratching I cannot stop and my skin 
easily bleeds and gets infected Sports Exercise can trigger attacks for some asthma sufferers but 
luckily that's not the case for Natalie. In fact she finds that doing lots of sports has made her 
chest stronger so she suffers from fewer colds and asthma attacks Triggers
Natalie can't have many stuffed animals and she can't have pets or wear wool either because the 
dust from these can bring on an asthma attack. The family house has no carpets or curtains for 
the same reason Inhalers Natalie treats her asthma with two inhaler sprays. She must use her 
preventer every day to calm her airways. Her reliever opens up her airways if she gets an attack
Spacer device Preventer spray Reliever spray When I have an asthma attack my chest feels all 
tight and horrible. Sometimes I cannot stop coughing. That's when I take my reliever to make it 
easier for me to breathe Ice skates I do gymnastics on Wednesday swimming on Thursday netball on 
Friday and ice skating on Saturday. I also like rollerblading and I do it whenever I can outside 
our house Diet Natalie suffers from food allergies so she must be careful about what she eats. 
Milk cheese and eggs could make her very sick Cheese Egg Milk Natalie's room Development
Development Development Development noun to develop verb to bring out the possibilities of
To grow To mature or evolve Education is the right of every child. Education should help children 
to develop their personalities talents and abilities. It should also teach them to respect other 
people. Every child should have time and somewhere safe to play. All children should be allowed to 
have privacy if they want to spend some time on their own
Development Education Every child has the right to an education Numeracy literacy stimulation 
skills information concepts School rules Human beings are always learning. School gives you 
skills such as reading writing and math. It also develops your personality talents and abilities. 
Just as importantly it teaches you your rights and responsibilities and guides you so you learn to 
respect others and to live peacefully with them Development Education Why do we need an education
Do you ever wish you didn't have to go to school Millions of children around the world can't ever 
go to school. More than half of them are girls If you can't read write or do simple math it is hard 
to find a good job and people may take advantage of you. Without school it is very difficult to 
escape poverty. Children who go to school get better jobs when they're older they live longer and 
are healthier School is more than reading writing and math. School is a place to learn about 
self-respect and dignity and to find out about our rights. School is also where we learn about 
staying healthy and how to prevent disease Why are girls behind boys in literacy One girl in 
four around the world who should be in school full time is not In sub-Saharan Africa about 
percent of girls are not being educated In some places people do not believe that girls need an 
education Some girls are kept at home to help around the house or to work on the family farm or 
business Families that cannot afford to send all their children to school may only send the boys
One out of every seven people around the world cannot read or write this sentence
Why isn't there education for everyone Some children live in places without schools or teachers. 
In some places there are no schools or not enough qualified teachers. Sometimes there are schools 
but they can't cater for children with disabilities or special needs
Some work to help support their families.  Parents might only be able to afford an education for 
some of their children and may need the others to work and bring home wages. So in one family some 
children may go to school and others may not
Some can't afford school tuition. Not all countries provide free education. Even when education 
is free parents may not be able to afford the cost of books school uniforms and other equipment 
such as pens or notebooks 
Some have no families help them. Children who have run away from home or who are or orphaned 
may be sleeping on city streets. They are struggling just to survive and very few of them manage 
to get an education Around the world  people are recognizing that the key to improving lives is to 
educate girls and women Nearly of children in the and Europe go to school 
Of children not in primary school are girls are boys In poorer countries only of girls and of 
boys go on to secondary school Million women and million men are unable to read or write
Development Education School for all Education is the key to a better future for everyone 
but for millions of children going to school is no easy matter. All over the world governments 
nongovernmental organizations parents and children themselves are finding ways to make sure that 
children receive the vital learning they need to improve their lives 
In North Korea a drought resulted in a food shortage which meant that millions of children were 
too hungry to go to school. After aid programs began supplying food to this preschool attendance 
rose from just percent to more than percent It's hard to concentrate on learning if your tummy is 
rumbling Bangladesh Until recently this girl spent her days working in a clothing factory. 
Then the company she worked for agreed to stop hiring children and to help pay for them to go to 
school instead. Now she is learning how to read. Informal schools like this give former 
child workers a chance to escape poverty This girl was lucky. Some children have to work and so 
miss out on going to school. Schools need to offer these children part-time schooling so they 
don't miss out completely Some Australian children living in the outback are hundreds of miles 
from the nearest school. The only way they can study is by talking to their teachers on two-way 
radios and sending in their homework by mail Education is so important that when a child 
cannot go to school the school must come to the child
Kenya For thousands of orphaned children like year-old Thomas getting an education was just a 
dream until he started attending a UNICEF assisted center in Nairobi. The center provides 
education counseling and skills training to children who are living or working on the streets. 
For these children it's much more than just a school it's a lifeline School gives you hope
Thomas displays his new skills in arithmetic. He has lived on the streets since he was years old. 
Receiving an education means he has a brighter future. Development Education Botswana Namibia
Lesotho South Africa South Africa At the southern tip of the African continent lies south Africa. 
The country is rich in natural resources including coal tin iron ore gold and diamonds Uniform 
Sbongile wears a white shirt and a navy blue and white sweatsuit to school. It has the school 
emblem on it and says Ellerton
Sbongile Just a few years ago Sbongile could not have attended Ellerton primary school 
in south Africa. At that time the apartheid laws prevented black and white people from mixing. 
Those laws have now been completely abolished Early bird Ellerton is near the beach in sea point a 
long way from Sbongile's home. Sbongile's mother wakes her up at so she can be picked up for the 
trip to school at A driver picks up of us from our houses. I am the first one he picks up and then 
he picks up the other children. I get to school at I take books pencils and a reading book to 
school. Sometimes I take sandwiches tuna and polony processed meat or cheese and bacon and egg 
salad. Sometimes my mother gives me money to buy a pie or a Samosa from the cafeteria
Languages Pupils at Ellerton speak at least seven languages other than English and Afrikaans. 
These include the African languages of Xhosa, Zulu, and Sotho There are children in my class. 
We are lucky because in some of the other classes there are about. We sit in groups of six
Sbongile's math book Ellerton Primary Numeracy Sbongile Assembly There is an assembly once a 
week where the children sing their school song and the national anthem. Lessons include math 
English Afrikaans Science and history. Sbongile's favorite is science because there is so much to 
learn Sometimes in our classes we bake and make snacks. In music we sing songs. 
We also do computers art and library lessons. In the summer we swim in the school's swimming pool
Come play Murals The school is decorated with bright murals. Sbongile loves Ellerton but when she 
first started she felt the rules were very strict. In the playground we play four blocks and 
cops and robbers. But my favorites are games with a tennis ball which I play with my friends

Development Education Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Tajikistan Pakistan Iran Afghanistan Afghanistan 
Fewer than one in five women and one in two men can read in Afghanistan. Now under a new 
government much more schooling is available for girls Maria For six years girls in Afghanistan 
were not allowed to go to school at all. Now things have changed. Maria attends a girls' school in 
Kabul run by the new government with help from UNICEF Life in Afghanistan In a new government 
came to power in Afghanistan. Since then there have been schools and educational opportunities for 
women. Maria was lucky that there were schools she could go to by the time she reached school age.
During the time I was too young to go to school I studied at home. My older sister Tamana 
helped me learn how to read and write An early start Maria has to get up early so she can be at 
school by she wears the school uniform a nice black tunic and pants with a white headscarf
It takes minutes to walk to school from our house. I go to school with two of my sisters. 
My brothers go to a different school Time for learning The girls sit on a rug during classes. 
Maria sits next to her best friend Hafiza. she studies hard because she would like to become a 
teacher My favorite subject is Dari afghan Persian which is the language that we speak. 
I find it easy Fun with friends Maria plays with her friends and also eats a snack she has brought 
from home. Maria's school is only for girls I like to jump rope during recess but my favorite 
thing about school is playing soccer A gift from UNICEF Every child at Maria's school received a 
special school bag and notebooks from UNICEF School bag School books Maria's name in Dari 
I want to be a teacher Two of my wishes are to have a new house and to stay in Kabul






Development Play Every child has the right to play Running jumping skipping pretending imagining 
laughing A serious business Playing is actually very important. You don't need expensive toys just 
a good imagination. Kids don't need to speak the same language to play together. Sports exercise 
your body team games teach you to work with other people and play that involves pretending 
lets you use your imagination Development Play What's the point of playing Play might not seem 
like an essential activity but it is. Playing is the main way children prepare for growing up.
Playing on your own teaches you to think for yourself and to enjoy your own company
Playing with others teaches you to get along with other people and work well in a group
Playing allows you to be creative and enables you to explore the world around you safely
Playing trains you to be resourceful and to use your imagination Pretending acting singing building 
hiding seeking chasing painting Many children don't get the chance to play. That's because it's 
hard to play when You have to work long hours It is too polluted dirty or unsafe outside
There is a war or a war has recently ended You have suffered mentally or emotionally 
You have no energy because you don't get enough food to eat There is not enough room to play 
inside your house You have to take care of your younger brothers and sisters all the time
You are physically sick Playing can be messy How many different ways to play can you think of
You can play by yourself by jumping on your bed reading a book dressing up or keeping a diary
You can make things by drawing or painting building a model airplane baking a cake or making a 
monster You can have a hobby like collecting stickers or rocks playing an instrument doing magic 
tricks or taking care of a pet You can play with others in the playground in the park using board 
games or by inventing your own games You can take part in sports. Team sports like football or 
soccer teach you how to get along with others. Gymnastics running and swimming teach you to rely on 
yourself. All sports help keep you fit and healthy You don't need toys to play but you do need 
time and a place to be by yourself or with your friends Adults keep out It's hard to play with 
adults looking over your shoulder All children are entitled to their privacy Development Play
Just playing Children are the experts when it comes to playing. Indoors or outdoors whether or not 
there are toys to play with kids can always find a way to keep busy and have fun Botswana
Playing a game called Makaroo A boy sits in the middle of a circle of chairs while other boys run 
around him There are games that you can only play when there are lots of people to have fun with. 
What other games can you think of that require a lot of players
South Africa Children are playing in a daycare in King William's town Jumping around is fun and 
makes you feel good but it can tire you out Peru Look at how this boy is using his whole body. 
Soccer involves all of you not just your feet and a ball Soccer is probably the most popular 
game in the world Philippines Building blocks and jigsaw puzzles demand quietness and 
concentration. It's easy to become very absorbed in this kind of play
Sometimes it's nice to play close to other people without actually playing with them. 
You can share ideas but still do things your own way Kenya This Somali boy holds a toy bus he 
created out of paper and cardboard. It took a lot of time and imagination to make this toy
You can play by making something and then you can play with the thing you've made
Cuba Three Ukrainian boys play chess at a camp providing medical assistance to children who have 
suffered exposure to radiation A game of chess can take hours because the players spend so much 
time thinking carefully about the moves they will make Development Play Australia Australia 
Australia's population is small in relation to its size. Some farming families live hundreds of 
miles from their neighbors. Michael A sheep and cattle station in the South Australian outback is 
home to Michael his sister and their parents. Because he lives so far from the school Michael does 
his schoolwork alone and talks to his teacher over a two-way radio Animals In addition to cattle 
and sheep there are other animals at the station. The family keeps chooks chickens for their eggs 
and ducks for their meat there are dogs and also horses used for mustering rounding up the cattle
I help feed and water the dogs chooks ducks horses and cattle. When I grow up I would like my own 
cattle station so I could be like dad Outdoors Michael spends a lot of time outdoors. He loves 
taking the dogs for a run and riding his bike around the station. Twice a year he goes to camp 
where he meets other children his age. Sheep There are sheep and cattle on the ranch. 
Once a year the sheep are sheared for their wool. Even Michael and Rebecca get involved although 
most of the work is done by hired sheep hands I talk to my friend Naish on the school radio after 
my lessons. He lives on Bulgunnia Station miles km from here Aussie rules The ball is kicked in 
Aussie rules soccer but players are also allowed to catch and run with it. Michael and Rebecca 
practice but they can't play a real game you need two teams of players for that 
The best thing about living in the outback are the windmills the open spaces and sunsets. 
The worst thing is not being able to see my friends Toys and games Michael plays on his own with 
his toys trucks tractors and a motorcycle. He loves reading outback magazine and he also watches 
television and plays games on his computer The little farm Michael's favorite book 
Michael's favorite teddy bear Protection Protection Protection Protection Noun to protect
Verb to defend or guard from attack invasion loss insult etc. cover shield from harm Every child 
should have someone to love and care for them Every child should be protected from work that could 
harm or exploit them Disability should not prevent any child from participating fully in life
Children need protection from the fighting and destruction of war Protection Love and Care
Every child needs love and care Love care hugs support safety laughter company Someone to take 
care of you Children need the support of caring adults. It's often parents who have this job but 
not always. Adult carers should do whatever is best for the child. Every child needs an adult who 
can listen to them comfort them when they are hurt or sad and encourage them to be sensitive to 
others Protection Love and Care Who loves and cares for you Everyone needs someone to take care of 
them You don't just share a home with the people you live with you also share your life with them. 
They love you and take care of you Children can live with mothers fathers aunts uncles cousins 
bigger brothers or sisters grandparents stepparents foster parents adoptive parents parents' 
girlfriends or boyfriends or just friends Your family can have just one other person or. 
They can be young or old male or female the important thing is that they care for you
Love makes the world go round Think of what your family does for you They cook your dinner and 
make you eat all your vegetables They ask if you have any homework to do and try to help you do it
Before you could read they told you bedtime stories and sang to you They usually buy you the 
clothes and shoes you wear They make you clean up your room and tell you when to go to bed 
They try to help you in every way they can Mothers grandmothers aunts cousins stepmothers Foster 
mothers adoptive mothers carers Fathers grandfathers uncles cousins stepfathers foster fathers 
adoptive fathers carers Big brothers let you play with them Little brothers give you hugs and kisses
Big sisters let you play with them Little sisters give you hugs and kisses Some families can't 
take care of their children because of Poverty Some families are overwhelmed by poverty and just 
can't afford to care for all of their children. In such a situation a child might have to leave 
home to find work Death When parents die children often go to live with relatives. If no one can 
take care of orphaned children they may end up homeless War In the more than million children 
were orphaned or separated from their families by war. Organizations such as UNICEF help reunite 
them. Violence in the home is an awful reality for some. Child victims of violence may run away 
and end up living on the streets What then The government makes sure that these children are taken 
care of by providing orphanages or foster homes for them or by finding adoptive parents
Growing up alone More than million children under have lost one or both parents to AIDS 
At least million children a year are left motherless by death in childbirth
Millions of children live on their own on the streets of the world's cities Protection 
Love and Care Family feelings Just like people families come in different shapes and sizes. 
Family members are often related to one another but they don't have to be. It also doesn't matter 
how many there are in your family as long as you all support and love each other Burundi
Terrible fighting has raged in Burundi leaving many orphans. A woman called Maggy opened a foster 
home where she takes care of all the children in the photograph below 
children who are temporarily without a home may live in foster care. Eventually they might return 
home or be adopted permanently by a new family Lesotho This mother and her son live in a center 
run by Catholic nuns. There are more than young woman living there some of whom have children of 
their own. The women learn skills and produce goods that are sold at the local market
Some parents no longer live together. Their children normally live with either their mother or 
their father but typically they may visit their other parent England This family consists of a 
mother a father and a child whom they have adopted. Children whose parents are dead or unable to 
care for them may be permanently adopted by a new family. People who want to adopt children 
to be checked out to make sure they will be good parents It's all right for adopted children to 
think about their biological parents sometimes even if they are happy and secure with their 
adoptive family Pakistan Families where several generations live together are common in many 
countries. In Pakistan when a man gets married his bride usually joins him in his parents' home. 
Their children grow up surrounded by aunts uncles and cousins In a large family like this you 
never need a babysitter because there is always someone around to help take care of the children
China This is a small family it consists of two parents and just one child China is slightly 
smaller than the but it contains more than four times as many people. It is a very densely 
populated country Finland There are children in the Oikarinen family sons and daughters their ages 
range from to years old The average number of children in a Finnish family is just but Bertta and 
Seppo Oikarinen belong to a religious movement that encourages people to have large families
Protection Love and Care Croatia Romania Serbia Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Montenegro Kosovo
Albania Kosovo After years of war in the Balkans peace has returned to Kosovo and it is being 
rebuilt. Most of its residents are Kosovar Albanians Ivana Until two years ago Ivana lived in an 
institution for children and adults. Some residents had mental disabilities or mental illnesses 
some were physically disabled and some had no disabilities. Conditions were bad and few people 
received the care they needed Children's home When she was Ivana came to live in a brand-new 
children's home with just eight other children and caring staff I stay up late to talk and to play 
with my toys together with Marina and Jasmina my roommates. They are my best friends. I am very 
happy in my new home Carers The staff at the home care for the children like parents and give them 
lots of love and hugs One day I want to be a nurse and give babies injections really slowly so it 
does not hurt them and they don't cry School Ivana received no education in the institution. 
Since coming to live in the home she has started attending the local primary school 
I like school but not when there is too much homework and I don't have time to play with 
my friends in the home All my toys are good Protection Work No child should be exploited through 
work Tiring low wages long hours boring no free time exploitation Working for a living Most adults 
have to work to earn money. Many children have to work to help their family. When children work 
they don't have time for other things. Work can be a fun and important part of growing up but no 
work should be harmful or take the place of learning playing and having time to enjoy being a child
Protection Work Why do children work More than million children between ages five and work for a 
living. More than half of them work in dangerous jobs. Children often work long hours for little 
pay in poor conditions. Most children who work full time do it to help their families. Even when 
children are not well paid their income can make a big difference Child workers are deprived of 
the simple joys of childhood and are forced into a life of drudgery Many businesses employ young 
children because they can be paid very little or nothing at all and can be easily taken advantage 
of Some work is dangerous and can lead to stunted growth and accidents Some part-time work is all 
right for children It is important to know the difference between child labor that takes advantage 
of children and work that does them no harm Not all work is bad for children Some types of work 
can be all right if You are not too young for the job You can stop any time you want to 
It does not interfere with school or play You are paid decent wages It is not dangerous to your 
physical or mental health You have time to spend with your family
You are treated fairly and have someone to complain to if you are not Working is wrong when 
You are too young for the job It involves unsafe or harmful work or working conditions
You cannot stop when you want to There is little or no pay It prevents you from going to school or 
takes the place of school It separates you from your family You were treated unfairly or abused
Problems with child labor Some types of labor are not acceptable for children and should not be 
tolerated anywhere Many children never get the chance to just be children Million working children 
are under. In the short-term they miss out on education and in the long term they are more likely 
to die early In Brazil Kenya and Mexico at least one in four farm workers is under years old
Sometimes children as young as eight are taken to other countries to work Children often work the 
longest hours and are the worst treated of all laborers Millions of girls work long hours as 
domestic laborers in private homes where beatings and harassment are common In sub-Saharan Africa 
percent of all children between the ages of and work Protection Work Hard work Most countries 
have laws that limit the hours children are allowed to work and control the age at which they can 
work full-time. The major reason for these laws is that children already have work to do schoolwork 
and that is what should come first Ecuador Rosita like one third of Ecuador's population 
works in agriculture. Here she helps harvest wheat. It is extremely hard work if done by hand and 
not by machine Agricultural work is often seasonal. At harvest time schools in farming areas may 
close down so that children can help their families to gather in the crops Mauritania Mame Diara 
is an orphan living with her cousins. She does most of the household chores including cleaning 
cooking and taking care of the family's animals When we think about child labor we often forget 
that millions of children are working not in fields or factories but in private homes England
Douglas lives on his dad's farm. He helps out whenever he is not at school. His main job is 
feeding the family's three sheepdogs and two pet dogs The kind of work that Douglas does is not 
exploitative. British children are allowed to work a few hours a day as long as the work does not 
harm them and their education is not affected
Iraq Ten-year-old Dana sells candy on a street in Erbil. Dana does not earn very much money for 
the long hours he works. He also runs the risk of getting sick or of being robbed
In addition to missing out on their education child workers on the streets are also easy targets 
for criminals. These children are vulnerable to violence and abuse Protection Work Nepal
India Myanmar India Bangladesh Bangladesh Sixty percent of people in Bangladesh do not have enough 
money to live on. Almost percent of the population are between and years old Arif A special 
program has given Arif who lives in a slum The chance to work as a reporter on a television show 
for by and about children. The show Mukta Khabor has allowed Arif to excel Rickshaw workshop
Like many other slum children Arif had a job as well as attending school. It was hard work and 
very badly paid. My hands used to really ache after days of work painting rickshaws. Now things 
are different Bicycle rickshaw Child reporter The young crew of Mukta Khabor research report and 
run the newsroom entirely on their own. They have become role models for other young Bangladeshis
Mukta Khabor logo I earn four times more than in my old job and I learn new things every day
Painting Arif discovered he had a talent for art and became a good painter through his job at the 
rickshaw workshop. He still enjoys painting in his free time I like it when local people tell my 
parents they saw me on television Arif's art Family Arif has three brothers. Sharif is nine 
Rajiv is seven and Raju is four. Arif is happy that he can help his family with the money he earns 
from Mukta Khabor If I were president I would help parents so they don't have to send their 
children to work Communal kitchen Arif's mother prepares a meal of fish in the kitchen the family 
shares with other families. Everyone in the family eats together Protection War No child should 
fight in a war Danger confusion fear machines soldiers destruction Not for kids War is a fact of 
life for many children. War uproots families and destroys communities. After a war children need 
help rebuilding their lives. Children are the most innocent victims of war. They are sometimes 
even dragged into wars and forced to fight against their will. These children are robbed of their 
childhood Protection War What happens in a war No child ever started a war but children fight and 
die in wars every day. No child should have to live through a war Normal life is impossible 
during war. Communities break down when people are forced to leave their homes and schools and 
hospitals are destroyed Families are damaged by war. Children may become separated from their 
families. Many people are killed or injured both physically and emotionally The damage continues 
long after the war is over. Children and their families must somehow put their lives back together 
and learn how to live normally again War is not a game. In war innocent people suffer During the 
more than million children died in wars. Millions more die from hunger and disease caused by war
Million women and children had to flee. Many of them never return to their homes Armed conflicts 
are raging in more than countries. Around children are fighting in wars Million children have 
wounds from war. Landmines kill or injure nearly children every day Children have the right to be 
protected from the dangers of war. Children affected by war may need help recovering. War kills 
but it also destroys normal life in many other ways War destroys life Most of the people who die 
or are injured in war are not soldiers but ordinary people who cannot fight back. It is women 
children and elderly people who suffer the most War destroys childhood Children who have seen 
horrible things respond in different ways. Some may feel depressed or hopeless about the future. 
Others might become angry or violent War destroys homes During war people are forced to leave their 
homes and their countries and become refugees. Often they never come back. Wars have made 
millions of children homeless War destroys play Long after a war is over landmines buried in 
schools playgrounds and fields continue to wound or kill children and adults
Danger mines Facts about landmines Each year more than children are killed or hurt by landmines
Children are at risk from landmines in countries A landmine can cost less than to manufacture and 
to find and dispose of safely Protection War War and recovery War is bad for everyone but 
particularly for innocent children. How do wars and conflicts affect children. And how are 
children helped to recover after the fighting ends Hands linked these former child soldiers 
board a airplane that will take them to a better life Leaving war behind The real work begins 
after the fighting has stopped. Homes and communities are rebuilt and families reunited. Schools 
reopen and children begin to catch up on what they have missed. Recovery kit 
A kit containing high-protein bars bandages school supplies and a shirt saying all children all 
rights everywhere is given to former Sudanese child soldiers to help them get back to normal
Sudan During the Civil War these children were forced to become soldiers. Now they are being 
flown to transit centers where they will receive health care education and counseling to help them 
recover from their experiences. UNICEF and other organizations will make every effort to trace 
their families. It is hoped that they will soon be able to return home and resume a normal life
Rwanda These boys from Rwanda have survived the fighting. Now they are receiving support to help 
them deal with their wartime experiences here in a trauma treatment center run with UNICEF support 


they wield fake guns that they have made themselves and act out some of the things they have 
witnessed This family was separated during war but has been reunited with help from aid agencies
Angola Although the war is now over danger still lurks just beneath the surface. This man teaches 
children in a displaced persons' camp to beware of buried landmines. It is estimated that there 
are still between and million unexploded landmines in Angola and as many as million unexploded 
landmines scattered in countries throughout the world
Deactivated landmines Landmines are very cruel weapons. Most injuries are suffered by civilians 
long after the conflict is over. Yugoslavia A child refugee from Kosovo holds an umbrella over his
 mother who is cradling her younger child in her arms. The family is waiting to board a bus that 
will take them to safety in neighboring Albania. Having left home in a hurry these refugees like 
many others have abandoned their homes and most of their possessions Families frequently become 
separated in the rush to escape a conflict.  UNICEF works to reunite these children and their 
parents

Protection WarNames have been changed to protect the people involved I like soccer. If I don't 
become a doctor I might want to become a professional soccer player Sierra Leone Guinea Liberia
Sierra Leone Raging Civil War in Sierra Leone resulted in many deaths. Almost one in three people 
fled from their homes. Isa During the war in Sierra Leone some fighters came to Isa's house and 
took him away. After two years he was released along with other children caught up in the war. 
He is now back home. Back together again An organization called Caritas Took care of Isa for a 
year. Then he went back to his family. Isa recently went to a Christmas party organized by 
Caritas I have two brothers called Boy and Yasuf and two sisters called Sally and Kai. My new baby 
sister Marie is just five months old. I also play with my cousins who are called Momoh, 
Jeneba, and Fatu Harvest time Nobody plants crops during a war because they might have to leave 
before the food can be harvested. Now that there is peace Isa has planted some ground nuts.
I would like to help my country because a lot has been destroyed and needs rebuilding Time for 
school Wearing his school uniform and reading a book Isa walks with his father. At school Isa 
studies math English geography social studies and the Bible I lost three years of school 
because of the fighting. I am now years old and I am really happy at the school I go to. 
My favorite subject is English UNICEF I want to be a doctor Playing with friends Isa has no toys of 
his own but there are always children around to play with I like playing checkers with my best 
friend Brima. Another game we play is called balancing ball Playing balancing ball Protection 
Disability No child should be held back by a disability Respect opportunity patience encouragement 
understanding Enjoying a good life We all deserve the chance to do our best. Disabled people may 
need some extra help. Help starts with understanding and caring. We can't always prevent people 
from being disabled but we can make sure that disabled people have the same opportunities as 
everyone else Protection Disability What is life like with a disability Imagine trying to move 
around if your legs didn't work or communicating if you couldn't hear or see clearly
Children who are disabled are just like everyone else except that some parts of their bodies do 
not work very well. Disabled children can lead normal full wonderful lives as long as they receive 
the right kind of support The biggest problem that disabled children face is when people do not 
understand their needs. Letting disabled children speak and listening to what they have to say are 
the best ways to help them Disability can have some effect on your life or it can affect your life 
a lot Sometimes disabled children need equipment. They may use hearing aids or artificial limbs 
Training and education can help disabled people. Blind people can learn to use a guide dog
Operations and medicine can help some disabilities. An operation may help repair a damaged limb 
Disabled people want to be treated normally A disability can be many things. It can be Physical
A difficulty with part of the body Visible Such as a missing limb or the inability to walk
Mental Some disabilities make it hard to think Invisible Such as deafness or dyslexia
Disability can happen in many ways Some children are born disabled. Some children are disabled in 
accidents Some children are disabled by war. Some children are disabled by disease 
Children with disabilities should not be discriminated against. They should be given equal 
treatment education jobs and a chance to lead normal lives
What you can do to help
Always be patient and understanding with people who may need extra help.
Volunteer to help someone with a disability
Never make fun of anyone with a disability
Protection
Disability
Living with a Disability
Having a disability does not necessarily mean you can't see speak hear or walk it may just take a 




little more effort to do things. Doctors can sometimes help to ease a disability but most 
disabled people cope by being resourceful and finding alternative ways of doing things. 
Like everyone else they appreciate people behaving considerately toward them Cuba 
Julia was two when she caught an infection that led to an eye condition. She was almost blind when 
an operation on the Orbis teaching eye hospital restored her sight. It's a very unusual hospital 
because it's actually on board an airplane The plane travels with a crew of volunteer doctors. 
In each country they perform surgery with up to local doctors watching. This way the local doctors 
learn how to perform the same life-changing operations Jamaica This little girl cannot walk but 
that doesn't mean she needs help to move around. The metal rails on the back of her wheelchair 
allow her to be mobile by using her arms When there is a problem with one part of the body another 
part may be able to take over its job Romania Using a mirror a speech therapist at a kindergarten 
helps a child practice speaking. There are many different reasons why people might find it 
difficult to speak. They might be hard of hearing or have difficulty controlling the muscles that 
are responsible for speech or maybe the part of their brain that deals with speech has been damaged
With help and encouragement children who find it difficult to speak clearly or to talk at all can 
improve their language skills and speak more confidently Nicaragua
Deaf people may learn to use sign language to communicate with each other. Sign language differs 
from country to country Deaf people may also learn to read lips. By watching the mouth of the 
person speaking they can figure out what words are being said Yugoslavia Burim from Kosovo Lost 
his legs in an accident but he is learning to walk again using artificial legs and walker. 
Eventually he hopes to be able to walk on his new legs unaided Physically disabled people can 
participate and excel in sports. The very best disabled athletes compete in the world-class 
Paralympic Games Protection Disability Canada Atlanta Mexico The United States is the third 
largest country in the world in both its physical size and population When he was five Of Atlanta 
Georgia was hit by a car. He had to re-learn how to walk talk and even eat. These days despite 
some mental disabilities is an avid soccer player Family support Family is proud of his athletic 
skills. They always come to support him when he plays a soccer game Has overcome a lot to get where 
he is today. He doesn't let anything deter him. He is a blessed child mother Recovery
parents were told he wouldn't be able to recognize them when he woke from his coma but he knew who 
they were right away Therapy focus on patients and families Back from the brink 
Love gives a helping hand Soccer fans Although it is not as popular as some other sports many 
people in the play soccer. In the country even hosted the World Cup There are eight kids on my 
team. We practice every morning. We play against other kids in tournaments
soccer shoes Soccer trophies As well as soccer Has received trophies in recent years for playing 
baseball basketball and bowling Special Olympics Plays soccer with the Special Olympics. 
It runs sports events worldwide for people with mental disabilities Our soccer team is called the 
trickum Tigers. I like being the defender and I like getting a chance to kick the ball
Future Has recovered well from his accident but he still goes to physical therapy at the local 
hospital and has speech therapy lessons at schoolI want to be a fireman so I can help people when 
there is a fire in their house
Participation Participation Participation Participation Noun to participate Verb to take part or 
to share with others To form a partnership with others To share benefits Every child has the right 
to an identity including name nationality and religion Every child has the right to freedom of 
expression A good life lived to its full potential is the right of every child Participation
Identity Every child has the right to an identity Name nationality religion family culture 
community Who am I Everyone needs to belong to a community. Some children are excluded from a 
community because they do not have a name or a nationality. when you have a name a nationality and 
the right to practice your religion you can fully participate in the life of your country and 
community Participation Identity Who are you What is your name where are you from what religion do 
you practice no one should be able to take your identity from you Your name is special. 
What does it mean to you Your name might mean something in the language you speak or in a language 
that is part of your religion or culture Your name connects you to members of your family and your 
community both to those living and those who have died Your name may have been chosen for you by 
someone in your family or by a leader of your community Your name is a part of you. 
People should respect you by making the effort to call you by your correct name
People should be free to practice all religions There are many different religions such as 
Christianity Islam Judaism Hinduism and Buddhism.  Other religions include Sikhism Rastafarianism 
Zoroastrianism Bahai Jainism and many other besides Each religion has its own teachings. 
Jews have the Torah Hindus have the Vedas Muslims have the Koran Christians have the Bible 
Sikhs have the Guru Granth Sahib. Buddhists have the Thripitaka Every religion has different 
holidays. Muslims celebrate Eid ul-Fitr Buddhists celebrate Wesak Day Hindus celebrate Diwali 
christians celebrate Christmas Sikhs celebrate Baisakhi Jews celebrate Passover 
Every religion has its own holy places. Buddhists have Lhasa Sikhs have Amritsar Muslims have 
Mecca christians Jews and Muslims have Jerusalem Hindus have Varanasi Roman Catholic Christians 
have Rome Every religion has different forms of worship. Some use silence some use spoken prayers 
or chanting some religions use singing or dancing some use meditation some use special foods some 
light candles Everyone is born somewhere so why doesn't everyone have a nationality
Sometimes children do not get registered when they are born because their parents are afraid of 
going to the government offices Sometimes governments take away the nationality of certain people 
in their country. Often this is caused by war and often it causes war Sometimes children become 
refugees because of war. When this happens they may have to live in another country where they do 
not have any nationality Some governments deny nationality to people who belong to a particular 
ethnic group What can governments do Find all the children who are not registered and grant them 
nationality. Recognize everyone born in that country as a citizen. Help all refugees to return home
Participation Identity What's in a name Your name is an important part of your identity. 
It is part of who you are and it is one way that other people know you. Can you imagine what your 
life would be like if you did not have a name children's names are special to them and to their 
parents. What does your name mean Jasleen and Ravina are friends. Their names are from the Punjabi 
language. Jasleen means divine princess Ravina means a strong free spirit My parents chose the 
name Ravina for me because they expected me to be strong with a free spirit and character. 
My parents also named me after a famous river called the river Ravi

Bilal is a gentle name and 
it was the name of the first person who said the call to prayer Bilal's parents wanted a name 
that would reflect his Muslim religion so they named him Bilal after a companion of the prophet 
Mohammed Paul The name Paul originally meant little in the Bible Paul was the leader of the 
early Christian church My name doesn't mean anything special to my parents. They just liked the 
sound of it Paul Junique In Junique's Family her name means very special My dad thought I was 
unique so he put a in front of unique to make Junique both my parents agreed on my name
Meegan Is an old English word that means strong Meegan's middle name is Timothea which means 
honoring God I like my name my parents want me to live up to the meaning of my name
Meegan Mark My parents liked the sound of the name Mark so that's what they called me
mark Was a very important person in the Bible he wrote about Jesus' Life in one of the four Gospels
Mark Teresa In Chinese the name Teresa sounds the same as the word for happy My mother named me 
Teresa because she was very happy when I was born Teresa Meena Means princess her parents named her 
Meena because she was special just like a princess I like my name it makes me feel special Meena 
Haresh Is a Hindi name the first part of Haresh's name Har means God When I was a few months old 
my parents went to the temple and the priest picked the letter so my parents gave me a name 
starting with Participation Identity Nationality All nations and peoples are unique and special. 
Having a nationality means that you have the protection and benefits of a country. It also means 
that you share culture and history with the other people in your country Bangladesh A young country 
Bangladesh separated from Pakistan and finally became independent in after a long Civil War. 
Today Bangladesh is a vibrant country Children participate in their country's say yes for 
children campaign. The campaign aims to build support for the policies that will improve and 
protect the lives of children In northern Ireland Stephen Ruairi and Connell are proud of their 
Irish culture and support their local Gaelic football team
Gaelic football is an ancient Irish sport where teams of players try to punch bounce or kick a 
ball into or over a net Peru
The majority of people in Peru are Amerindian descendants of the Incas who once ruled Peru
The Peruvian mountains are home to many millions of Amerindians who still speak the local language 
of Quechua and maintain a traditional way of life
Spain
Uxue lives in Santander The capital city of a small province in northern Spain called Cantabria. 
This region is very close to the northern provinces of the Basque country where the people have a 
completely unique language and culture 
The regions of northern Spain are very different from those farther south. In Cantabria it is more 
mountainous and not so sunny. It is beautiful South Africa Many different people live in South 
Africa. In addition to various local ethnic groups south Africa is also home to people whose 
parents and grandparents emigrated from Europe and India South Africa has official languages. 
There are nine African languages as well as Afrikaans and English which were brought by the 
Dutch and British settlers who came in the century Participation Identity The Netherlands Germany
Belgium The Netherlands The Dutch people who live in the Netherlands have a long history of 
welcoming refugees and people in need Najaha and Abdisukri Najaha and Abdisukri are sister and 
brother. Their family came to the Netherlands from Somalia as refugees. They are now happy to think 
of themselves of Somali children living in the Netherlands
Adjusting to a new home
At school Najaha and Abdisukri play with children from many different countries. Because they were 
young when they left Somalia they have found it easy to adjust to life in the Netherlands
I like the Netherlands but I don't like the weather. It's always raining and it's too cold
Family photographs of Najaha and Abdisukri
Two languages Najaha and Abdisukri speak Somali when they are home with their family but most of 
the time they speak Dutch the language of the Netherlands
Soccer action
Abdisukri plays soccer with a famous soccer team near his home. It is called Willem
Someday I want to be a professional soccer player with the Willem soccer team like my favorite 
soccer player Jatto Ceesay who is from Gambia I love to play soccer. My coach calls me Abdi and 
says he is very proud of me Abdisukri's soccer trophy Daily prayers Abdisukri and Najaha's family is Muslim. The whole family prays five times a day. They also go to the mosque together where they meet some of their friends A plate with verses from the Koran School time Najaha enjoys mathematics reading writing stories and going to the amusement park. Study is important to Najaha because she wants to become a lawyer I don't have any best friends. All my friends are my best friends Najaha's school books Favorite foods
At home the family eats Somali food. Samosas are fried pancakes stuffed with meat and vegetables
Our favorite food is samosas Participation Religion Religion Each religion means something very 
special to those who practice it. That is why it is important that no one is prevented from 
following a religion or faith South Korea Eyes shut to help their concentration these children 
pray during Sunday school at a large Pentecostal church
In South Korea about half the people are Christian and half are Buddhist 
These girls are singing in a gospel church choir. Gospel music is very lively. The singers often clap and sway while they are singing because they feel so excited about praising God
Gospel music has its roots in songs that Africans brought to America as slaves and sang while they worked Jewish Torah scroll and pointer Tibetan buddhist prayer wheel Christian cross Islamic tile Sikh Nishan Sahib 
symbol Ganesh a Hindu god Myanmar At the shinbyu ceremony boys enter a Buddhist monastery for a short time. When they're older they may decide to 
become monks The boys dress like royal princes in the days of the first Buddhist priests more than years ago. It is a proud day for their parents
India During a coming-of-age ceremony young boys are given a sacred shirt and a thread to wear throughout their lives. This boy has now become a full 
member of the Parsi Zoroastrian community The sacred thread called the kusti is wrapped three times around the waist. It represents three important 
things to remember good thoughts good deeds and good words Participation Identity West Bank Gaza Jordan Israel Egypt Israel Jews from all over the 
world have chosen to make Israel their home though people of other faiths live in Israel too A new life Eli's Family spent two years arranging to 
move to Israel Eli was scared but also curious about his new life Eli Eli came to Israel from Uzbekistan in the former Soviet Union. His family are 
Jewish but Eli didn't know very much about Jewish beliefs or practices before he came to Israel Yemin orde Many of Eli's classmates live at Yemin 
Orde Youth village because they came to Israel without their parents. They learn about Judaism in school and also participate in Jewish activities 
outside school hours. Every Saturday they celebrate Shabbat the Jewish Sabbath My schools is called Yemin Orde I chose to come here so I could learn 
more about being Jewish Different backgrounds Children at Yemin Orde come from more than different countries including Ethiopia Russia and the former 
Soviet Union Brazil Mexico Colombia Slovakia Bosnia Romania Morocco India France Italy Great Britain Martinique and Israel
It's really interesting meeting children from so many countries. We are all Jews but we have different traditions which we share with each other at 
Yemin Orde Torah Eli studies the Torah The Jewish holy book in Hebrew but he also has a translation into Russian to help him understand it better
I like the special atmosphere on Shabbat. Sometimes I spend it with my family. We say some blessings at home but I don't always go the synagogue
Torah Kippa Tefillin containing verses from the Torah Prayer There is a beautiful synagogue at Yemin Orde. To pray Eli where is the skullcap called a 
kippa A shawl called a tallit and a tefillin which are a little boxes containing verses from the Torah At school we are encouraged but not forced to 
pray every day. I love finding out about my religion Participation Expression Every child has the right to free expression Opinions contribution 
respect participation individuality input
Saying and doing Show how much you care and take an interest. Expressing yourself means getting involved. There are millions of ways to express 
yourself. By expressing ourselves we share things we like and dislike and how we think and feel. This is an opportunity to learn about ourselves 
and others Participation Expression Express yourself What opinions and ideas do you have do you think they are important well you're right they are 
important your opinions and ideas could change the world The world is a great fun scary happy sad wonderful exciting place but it could be better 
Is there a problem in your school town country or another country that you think you could help solve Everyone has The right to express an 
opinion not just adults but children too. Children who cannot express their opinions may feel frustrated about living in a world they can't change
How many ways can you think of to express yourself Children had their say at the special session on children held at the United Nations headquarters 
in New York in May. This was a chance for children from around the globe to talk to world leaders about issues affecting them 
Take action and help make the world a better place by expressing your opinions and participating Think of something you would like to see improved 
or a problem you would like to see solved It can be in your school your city or somewhere far away Find out all you can about that problem and tell 
your friends about it too You could make contact with groups that are already working to fix it Think about how you as a child can help solve that 
problem For example you might not have money but you can encourage adults to give money to help Choose one way to help It can be a small thing such 
as not wasting resources or something bigger such as starting your own organization Protect our wildlife Help save dolphins World peace Creating 
draw paint sculpt photograph film record write You can share what you make with others Participating Recycle cans and bottles pick up garbage in the 
streets organize a clean-up in a local park Talking listen to what others have to say and tell them what you think Try to see things differently
Making friends Every time you meet someone new you can share new ideas and thoughts with that person Sharing Other children may have the same problem 
or concern as you Together you could fix it Getting adults to listen Agree on a time with parents and teachers when they can listen to your concerns
Try to bring along some facts to back up your opinions Allow your parents and teachers to respond to what you say Keep calm and treat people with 
respect Participation Expression Freedom of expression Human beings make speeches write stories paint pictures compose and sing songs perform dances 
and act in plays Sometimes we express ourselves because we have strong feelings or thoughts about something and we want to share them with other 
people Sometimes we express ourselves because we feel we need to Whatever the reason self-expression is something to enjoy and take pride in
Brazil These children members of EDISCA dance school discuss the production they are rehearsing. The show is about people who live in a garbage dump. 
The children in the dance company come from deprived communities themselves Everyone has to work hard in a dance company. While this dancer balances 
in a strikingly graceful pose another member works just as hard to support her there Botswana These girls are recording their discussion about AIDS 
for a  radio program. AIDS is a big problem in Africa and this program is a good way to get information about the disease out to young people
Self-expression includes art dances and music but words are important too. Children must speak out about things they care about or that affect them
Brazil Diego stands in front of a mural he painted of Bob Marley a Jamaican reggae musician Artists frequently work alone but a big work of art like 
this can involve many people This mural means that Diego's work can be seen and appreciated by many people It also makes the neighborhood much more 
colorful Bolivia A young boy learns to play the guitar a traditional instrument of the Andes The musical notes are written down in his notebook
Once you can play an instrument it's fun to play with a lot of other musicians Participation Expression Canada Seattle Mexico Before Europeans 
arrived in the years ago the land was home to hundreds of Native American nations I play hand drums and clackers for traditional drumming singing and 
dancing I think I'll always enjoy doing that Taralyn Taralyn attends Chief Leschi School near Seattle The Puyallup nation of Native Americans 
runs the school but pupils come from more than Native American nations They study English math and many other subjects as well as learning all about 
different tribal traditions Languages Some children speak a Native American language but classes are in English Sacred land The school is constructed 
around a sacred circle of land that stayed untouched throughout the building process Students and teachers do not enter this area but many school 
buildings look onto it You can see Mount Rainier from our school There are eagles that like to fly over our school I think that is special too
Powwows are social celebrations They don't belong to our historical tradition but to that of the plains tribes We love to join in anyway
Culture day The school holds an annual celebration of Native American traditions Local people are invited to join in the dancing All year the 
children make gifts which they finally give away during culture day Circle time Every day there is an opportunity for children to sing traditional 
songs do some drumming and learn about each other's nations during circle time I like circle best because we got to sing drum and dance Sometimes we 
also have special guests and storytelling Totem pole There are several totem poles on the school grounds Each one illustrates a particular legend and 
took months to carve In the main entrance to our school we have a totem pole that tells how the Puyallup River was formed by two black whales after a 
great flood Salmon feast Living near the coast the Puyallup nation traditionally enjoyed salmon as one of its staple foods There's always a big 
salmon barbecue on culture day Participation Life Every child deserves a happy life Dreams wishes ambitions goals achievements hope happiness
Aim high The future is in your hands You can make a better world What are your wishes for the future All around the world children like you are 
working to improve their communities If we all work together we can create a world where there is a happy life for everyone Participation Life 
Pakistan Nepal Bangladesh Sri Lanka India India More than a billion people live in India making it the world's second most populated country 
The climate ranges from tropical monsoon in the south to temperate in the north Sibasish The World Health Organization UNICEF and other partners are 
trying to wipe out polio Sibasish is a team leader in a project that teaches people living in slums in Kolkata Calcutta India about the disease and 
encourages families to vaccinate their children against it Polio kills A highly infectious disease polio mostly affects poor children under five years 
old Polio can be transmitted through food or water It starts with the same symptoms as the flu but it sometimes leads to paralysis and rarely death
We walk down the streets with posters Mine says get vaccinated and lead a good life We play music and sing songs to get the message out Polio vaccine
House to house Sibasish talks about polio and invites people to attend an immunization day when their children can be vaccinated Most are very happy 
to be protected against the disease and don't need much persuasion We go on campaigns three times a week to all the homes with children under five 
We teach people about polio and the importance of the vaccination The campaign against polio It is a privilege to be involved in the campaign 
Local children train as campaigners each year In addition to learning about polio they learn to be good communicators and leaders
Sometimes we go to people who are not in a good mood and they throw us out We don't give up Instead we go back again a day or two later when they 
have calmed down and tell them about polio Colorful charts Campaign bag Each child campaigner gets a special bag We have fun making charts and 
posters which we carry in these bags and use when we campaign I want to do good for other human beings and give every child a better tomorrow
Taking the vaccine A health worker gives a child the vaccine It is usually two drops of liquid on the tongue To be completely effective four 
separate doses must be taken Immunization day The work pays off on immunization day The campaigners do a final round making sure that parents are 
taking their children to be vaccinated We want a world free from polio Participation Life Panama Venezuela Colombia Brazil Peru Ecuador Colombia 
Civil war has been ravaging Colombia for more than years This has unsettled the lives of millions of children Mayerly 
Mayerly is one of the leaders of the children's movement for peace in Colombia The children's response to the violence in their country. The movement 
has been nominated for a Nobel peace prize three times
The children's movement for peace The movement began when Mayerly was invited to a meeting with children from various organizations. Her best friend 
Milton had recently been killed in a fight between youth gangs The children decided it was time for the violence to be stopped
We are tired of violence We have the right to be children and the right not to be afraid to go out Learning about peace The symbol of the children's 
movement for peace is the white hand seen on books shirts and banners The movement includes more than children They play games and support each 
other instead of joining violent gangs and becoming involved with weapons and drugs The white hand means no to violence The banner proclaims I am a 
peacebuilder the dove of peace flies over the Colombian flag Mayerly's mom Mayerly's parents were worried that she might be harmed for her 
involvement in the movement Now they are very proud of their daughter We are convincing children in our schools and people in our neighborhoods that 
this is the way to a better future No one can kill million Colombians who speak about peace We build peace with play and friendship Peacebuilders
The movement believes that Colombia's children deserve the right to live the right to peace the right to love and the right to safety for themselves 
and their families Parades like these have helped the government ban the recruitment of children under the age of into the Colombian army