A picture book of rosa parks 

Rosa parks was born in Tuskegee Alabama on February. Her mother leona edwards mccauley
was a schoolteacher. mccauley rosa's Father james was a carpenter and house builder. 
Rosa was the great granddaughter of slaves. Soon after rosa was born her family moved to pine level 
Alabama. They lived on rosa's grandparents' small farm where there were cows chickens fruit and 
nut trees. in When rosa was two years old her brother sylvester was born. 
Soon after that their father left. He moved around to find work. While rosa was growing up she hardly 
saw him. As rosa grew older she worked on her grandparents' farm and in the nearby cotton fields 
in the spring she cleared weeds away in the fall she picked cotton. 

When rosa was young discrimination against African americans was common. There were jim crow laws 
that kept black people and white people segregated. They were kept apart on streetcars and trains at 
parks and drinking fountains in churches hotels theaters and restaurants. Even the united states army 
was segregated. white colored

While rosa lived in pine level the ku klux klan a band of hate filled whites was active there. 
They wore white robes and covered their faces with pointed hoods. In southern cities and elsewhere in 
the united states members of the klan marched and helped elect political candidates who shared their 
hatred of African americans roman catholics jews and foreigners. 
They burned crosses and beat tortured and killed many African americans. 

rosa's Grandfather Sylvester Edwards carried a shotgun to protect his family from the klan. 

rosa's Mother taught rosa to read. Then when rosa was six she started first grade in an one room 
school for African American children. The school was open just give months a year. 
The new brick school building for white children was open nine months a year. 
School for black children  in pine level stopped after sixth grade so in rosa continued her studies in 
Montgomery Alabama. She had to leave school in because of family illness. She took care of her sick 
grandmother and then she cared for her mother who was sick too. 
Rosa finished high school in. 

in rosa met Raymond parks a barber and a man active in the struggle for the rights of African 
americans. Rosa was proud that he spoke up for what was right. Rosa and Raymond were married in 
December in her home in pine level.  

In the early rosa joined the the national association for the advancement of colored people an 
organization that worked to end the unfair treatment of African americans and others. 
Raymond parks had been a member for many years. Soon after rosa joined she was elected secretary of 
the Montgomery branch of the association. Buses in Montgomery were a daily reminder that the city was 
segregated. African americans were allowed only to sit in the back. On some buses they entered 
through the front door paid the fare and were told to leave the bus and go in again through the back 
door. Sometimes before they could get on again the driver drove away.
one day in rosa got on the front of a crowded bus and paid the fare. The driver james blake told her 
to get off and use the back door. Rosa told him she was already on the bus. 
She did not see the need to get off and besides that she did not think she could enter through the 
back door. It was blocked by the many people standing there. 
But rosa got off. She did not get on again. She waited for the next bus. 

Twelve years later on thursday december rosa parks met james blake again. 
Rosa was coming home from her work as an assistant at a Montgomery department store. 
She got on the Cleveland avenue bus and took a seat in the middle section. African americans were 
allowed to sit in the back and in the middle section too as long as no white passenger was left 
standing. As the next stop some white passengers got on and because the bus was crowded  
moved to the middle section where rosa was sitting. The driver told the four African American 
passengers in rosa's row to get up. Three of them did but not rosa parks. 
She had paid the same fare as the white passengers. She knew it was the law in Montgomery that she 
give up her seat but also knew the law was unfair. James blake called the police and rosa parks was 
arrested. on monday december Rosa went to the local court and was found guilty of breaking the 
segregation laws. She was fined ten dollars plus court costs. Rosa and her lawyers appealed to a 
higher court. Beginning on december to protest the arrest of rosa parks african americans in 
Montgomery refused to ride on public buses. They found other ways to get to work. 
Many walked some as far as twelve miles. 

The bus boycott was led by dr. martin luther king jr. the new minister at the dexter avenue Baptist 
church. On Monday evening december he spoke to a large crowd. He explained the reason for the boycott. 
There comes a time he said that people get tired we are here this evening to say to those who have 
mistreated us so long that we are tired tired of being segregated and humiliated tired of being kicked 
about by brutal feet of oppression. 

The boycott lasted more than a year. During that time almost no African americans rode a public bus in 
Montgomery Alabama. Rosa parks dr. king and many others were arrested. Homes of boycott leaders were 
bombed. on november The united states supreme court ruled that segregation on public buses was against 
the law. on december after the court reached montgomery the boycott ended. news reporters
came to talk to rosa and to photograph her sitting on a bus again

For some people the civil rights movement in the united states the fight for rights of all people to 
be treated as equals began with the arrest of rosa parks for many others it began one year earlier.  
in may the Supreme court had ruled that separate schools for blacks and whites were unequal and 
against the law. But while schools and buses in the united states could no longer be segregated there 
was still much discrimination against African americans rosa parks went to many demonstrations and 
civil rights marches. Rosa parks received threatening telephone calls her family worried about her 
safety. in Rosa and Raymond parks left Montgomery with rosa's mother and moved to detroit
michigan where rosa's brother Sylvester lived. 

in rosa began working in the detroit office of john conyers a member of the united states house 
of representatives. she did a lot of good work in that office including helping poor people
find homes she retired in 

the late were difficult years for rosa parks in 
After a long illness her husband died. Her brother died a short while later. And in rosa's 
mother died too. 


in rosa founded the rosa and raymond parks institute for self development to give young people 
hope and to help them complete their education. rosa parks has been called the mother of the 
civil rights movement. the movement brought many needed changes in the united states. it is now 
against the law for americans to discriminate against people because of their race color religion
or nationality. at work or in restaurants hotels and other public places. the right of every 
citizen to vote is protected rosa parks has received many honors among them the spingarn medal
the martin luther king jr. nonviolent award and the presidential medal of freedom cleveland 
avenue in montgomery was renamed rosa parks boulevard

but perhaps the greatest award for rosa parks was seeing people of all races on buses and in 
public schools and other places being treated fairly and with the respect all people deserve

author's notes tuskegee alabama rosa park's birthplace was the home of the tuskegee institute now called
tuskegee university it was founded in by booker washington as a place for african americans to 
learn the work skills needed to earn a livelihood.

the lawyer presenting arguments against segregated schools which led to the supreme court decision 
declaring that separate schools for whites and african americans are illegal was thurgood 
marshall in he was made the first african american associate justice of the united states
supreme court

important dates
born in tuskegee alabama on february
married raymond parks
elected secretary of the montgomery chapter of the 
the supreme court ruled on may in brown board of education of topeka that segregated schools
are unequal and violate the constitution of the united states
arrested on december for not moving to the back of the bus
the montgomery bus boycott began on december it ended december 
supreme court declared on november that segregation on public buses violates the constitution of the
united states
moved to detroit michigan
began work for congressman john conyers
founded the rosa and raymond parks institute for self development
was awarded the medal of freedom
died in detroit michigan october 