A Picture Book of Martin Luther King Jr


Martin Luther King Jr was one of America's great leaders. He was a powerful speaker and he spoke out 
against laws which kept black people out of many schools and jobs. He led protests and marches 
demanding fair laws for all people. Martin Luther King jr was born on January in Atlanta Georgia. 
Martin's father was a pastor. His mother had been a teacher. Martin had an older sister, 
Willie Christine, and a younger brother, Alfred Daniel. 

Young martin liked to play baseball football and basketball. He liked to ride his bicycle and to sing. 
He often sang in his father's church. Martin center with his brother Alfred daniel left and his sister 
Willie Christine right. Young martin played in his backyard with friends. One day he was told that 
two of his friends would no longer play with him because they were white and he was black. 
Martin cried. He did not understand why the color of his skin should matter to anyone. 
Martin's mother told him that many years ago black people were brought in chains to America and 
sold as slaves. She told him that long before martin was born the slaves had been set free. 
However there were still some people who did not treat black people fairly. 
In Atlanta where martin lived and elsewhere in the united states there were white only signs. 
Black people were not allowed in some parks pools hotels restaurants and even schools. 
Blacks were kept out of many jobs.  
white only
restroom
white only

Frederick douglass harriet tubman George Washington carver. Martin learned to read at home before 
he was old enough to start school. All through his childhood he read books about black leaders. 
Martin was a good student. He finished high school two years early and was just fifteen when he 
entered Morehouse college in Atlanta. At college martin decided to become a minister. After martin 
was graduated from Morehouse he studied for a doctorate at boston university. While he was there he 
met coretta scott. She was studying music. They fell in love and married. 
In 1954 martin luther king jr began his first job as a pastor in Montgomery Alabama. 
The next year rosa parks a black woman was arrested in Montgomery. She had been sitting behind 
the white only section on a bus. When all the seats in that section were taken the diver told her to 
get up so a white man could have her seat. Rosa parks refused. Dr martin luther king jr 
led a protest. Blacks throughout the city refused to ride the buses. Dr king said 
there comes a time when people get tired of being kicked out. 
boycott public buses equal rights

One night while dr king was at a meeting someone threw a bomb into his house. 
Martin's followers were angry. They wanted to fight. Martin told them to go home peacefully. 
We must love our white brothers he said we must meet hate with love. 
The bus protest lasted almost a year. When it ended there were no more white only sections on buses. 
Dr king decided to move back to Atlanta in 1960. There he continued to lead peaceful protests 
against white only waiting rooms lunch counters and rest rooms. He led many marches for freedom. 

we march for jobs for all now
end segregated rules in public schools we march for
we demand an end to bias now 
we march for jobs for all a decent pay now
we demand voting rights now
we demand decent housing now



In 1963 Dr King led the biggest march of all the march on Washington. 
More than two hundred thousand black and white people followed him. 
I have a dream he said in his speech. I have a dream that my four children will one day live in a 
nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. 

The next year in 1964 Dr King was awarded one of the greatest honors any person can win the 
Nobel Peace Prize. The country was changing. New laws were passed. Blacks could go to the same 
schools as whites. They could go to the same stores restaurants and hotels. 
White only signs were against the law. white only

Dr King told his followers to protest peacefully. 
But there were some riots and some violence. 
Then in april 1968 Dr King went to Memphis Tennessee. He planned to march so black and white 
garbage workers would get the same pay for the same work. 
On April 4 in Memphis Tennessee Dr King stood outside his motel room. Another man 
James Earl Ray was hiding nearby. He pointed a rifle at Dr King. He fired the gun. 
An hour later Dr King was dead. 

Martin Luther King Jr dreamed of a world free of hate prejudice and violence. 
Carved on the stone which marks his grave are the words I am free at last. 

important dates

Born on January 15 in Atlanta Georgia. 
Ordained a minister. 
Married Coretta Scott in Marion Alabama. 
Led boycott of Montgomery Alabama buses. 
Led the march on Washington on august 28 and gave his I have a dream speech from the steps of the 
Lincoln memorial. Was awarded the nobel peace prize.  
Assassinated on april 4 in Memphis Tennessee. 
The third Monday in January was declared an annual federal holiday by the united states congress to 
honor the life and ideals of martin luther king jr


rev martin luther king jr
free at last free at last 
thank god almighty i'm free at last