A River of Words: A Story of William Carlos Williams

The Woodthrush
fortunate man it is not too late
the woodthrush flies into my garden
before the snow he looks at me silent without moving
his dappled breast reflecting tragic winter thoughts 
my love my own

the red wheelbarrow
so much depends upon a red wheel barrow glazed with rain water
beside the white chickens

the great figure
among the rain and lights I saw the
figure in gold on a red firetruck moving 
tense unheeded to gong clangs siren howls and wheels rumbling 
through the dark city

This is just to say
I have eaten the plums that were in the icebox
and which you were probably saving for breakfast
forgive me they were delicious so sweet and so cold

metric figure
there is a bird in the poplars
it is the sun
the leaves are little yellow fish swimming in the river
the bird skims above them
day is on his wings Phoebus it is he that is making the great gleam among
the poplars it is his singing outshines the noise of leaves clashing in the wind


When I was younger it was plain to me I must make something of myself William Carlos Williams Pastoral

Atlas of the world  Rutherford

Like the other boys in Rutherford New Jersey Willie Williams loved to play 
baseball and to race his friends up and down the street. But when the other boys
went inside Willie stayed outside. Climbing over the fence to his backyard he 
wandered alone through the woods and fields. In those days just beyond town 
there were still many wild places for Willie to explore. My Willie has sharp 
eyes he notices everything! his mother told the neighbors. And it was true… 
as he walked through the high grasses and along the soft dirt paths Willie 
watched everything. When he grew tired he stretched out beside the Passaic 
River. The water went gurgle gurgle swish swish swoosh gurgle gurgle
slipping and sliding over the smooth rocks then poured in a torrent over the 
falls then quieted again below. The river's music both excited and soothed
Willie. Sometimes as he listened to  its perfect tune he fell asleep.
 As Willie grew older there was less time to wander through the woods and
 fields or to nap by the river. In high school willie had classes and track 
practice and lots of homework. Willie is always in a hurry! His mother told
 the neighbors. And it was true.  But when Mr. Abbott read poetry to
 Willie's English class willie did not feel hurried. The gentle sounds 
and shifting rhythms of the poems were like the music of the river. 
As the teacher read each line willie closed his eyes and let them make 
pictures in his mind. One night alone in his room willie began to write his
 own poems. At first he imitated the famous English writers he learned about 
in school. He counted the beats in each line and made he endings rhyme. 
The archer is awake! The swan is flying. Gold against blue an arrow is lying. 
Poetry suited willie. Every night he looked forward to sitting at his desk and
writing a few new lines. But after a while he grew frustrated. He had pictures 
in his mind that did not fit exactly into steady rhythms or rhymes. I have never
seen a swan or an archer willie thought. I want to write about ordinary things.
Plums wheelbarrows and weeds fire engines children and trees things I see when
I walk down my street or look out my window. So willie tried writing a new way. 
Instead of counting the beats or making the end words rhyme he let each poem
 find its own special shape on the page. There is a bird in the poplars! It is 
the sun! the leaves are little yellow fish swimming in the river. Now when he
 wrote poems he felt as free as the Passaic River as it rushed to the falls. 
Willie's notebooks filled up one after another. My boy is a good writer his 
mother said. And it was true. Unfortunately no one paid much money for poetry 
and willie needed to earn a living. Willie's mother had told him stories about
her older brother carlos who was a doctor. When our father died she told willie
carlos's salary provided for our whole family. Willie liked the idea of healing
 people and of providing for a family. But could he do both and still write
 poetry? At age nineteen willie went off to study medicine at the university
 where he met ezra pound hilda Doolittle and Charles Demuth. Ezra and were 
studying literature while Charlie studied painting. The friends spent many 
afternoons together discussing books music and art. The harder willie's medical
 training became the more he enjoyed the time he spent with them. When he 
graduated he returned to Rutherford and hung his sign William Williams MD-  
family medicine. Every morning Dr. willie Williams filled his black bag with 
medicines and instruments and drove off to visit patients in their homes. Every 
afternoon he returned to his office where more patients waited. All day he 
delivered babies healed hurts and bruises set broken bones and wrote 
prescriptions for coughs and fevers. Dr. williams is the busiest man in town
 said the neighbors and it was true. But no matter how many babies he delivered 
no matter how many sick people he cured willie could not stop writing poems. On 
his prescription pads he scribbled a few lines whenever and wherever he could.
 In those precious times the rhythm of the river he had rested beside as a child
 seemed to guide him. Like the water that sometimes ran slow smooth and steady 
and other times came rushing in a hurried flood willie's lines flowed across the
 page. After his long doctor's day willie climbed to the attic where he kept a 
lamp and a desk filled with letters from his artists friends and notes he'd
 make about things he'd heard seen or done. As the rest of Rutherford put out 
its lights willie took out his pen and his notes. He sat down and looked at the
 words and shaped them into poems. 

Author's Note
William Carlos Williams was a family doctor in his hometown of Rutherford, New Jersey
for more than forty years. He specialized in pediatrics (care of children) and obstetrics 
(delivering babies). Records indicate that he presided over more than births. Like most doctors of his time
Williams made house calls, spending his days and some nights too caring for the sick 
in their homes. During the Great Depression when many adults were unemployed 
and families could not afford to pay, Williams helped them anyway. Often after stitching
a wound, dispensing medicine for a fever or helping a woman deliver her child after a long
night's labor, he would leave with a homemade scarf, a jar of jam or a warm casserole
as payment. 

Despite the constant demands of his profession, Williams always made time for poetry
In his earliest verses he adopted the methods of traditional English poets who focused on grand topics 
and used regular patterns of rhyme. Slowly however he developed his own 
distinctive style in which he used shorter lines
brief stanzas and little or no punctuation.  But perhaps his most important contribution to
American poetry was his focus on everyday objects and lives of common people. In 
his poems, readers can find fire trucks, cats, flowerpots, plums, babies, construction
workers, and refrigerators. By stripping away unnecessary details Williams tried to 
"see the thing itself with great intensity and perception.

Although he wrote poems for most of his adult life, his poetry was not well known until he was in 
his sixties. By then, he had already published more than a dozen poetry books as well
as several volumes of essays, plays and short stories. Today William Carlos Williams is considered
one of our most influential American poets and his work is read and studied in schools
 and universities all over the world. Williams died in at the age of seventy-nine Jen Bryant

The song of Hiawatha
On a long and distant journey many moons and many winters will have come
and will have vanished ere I come again to see you but my guests I leave
behind me listen to their words of wisdom

I will write of leaves adn the moon in the treetops

The little sparrows hop ingenuously about the pavement quarreling with 
sharp voices over things that interest them.

Dreams are not a bad thing I am moved to write poetry So much depends upon labor

They call me and I go the door opens I smile, enter

the moon the dried weeds and the Pleiades seven feet tall the dark dried 
weedstalks make a part of the night a red lace on the blue milky sky write
by a small lamp the Pleiades are almost nameless and the moon is tilted and
half gone 

William Carlos Williams
Poetry publication dates
Peace on Earth The archer is awake
pastoral the little sparrows
metric figure there is a bird in the poplars
pastoral when I was younger
Complaint they call me and I go
the great figure among the rain
the red wheelbarrow so much depends
the descent of winter the mood the dried weeds
this is just to say I have eaten 
the woodthrush fortunate man it is not to late
children's games little girls 



September William Carlos Williams is born in Rutherford NJ
Brother Edgar Ed Williams is born
studies at private schools in Switzerland and France Attends high school in
New York City
Begins medical school at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Makes
friends with painter Charles Demuth and poets Ezra Pound and Hilda Doolittle
writes poetry in his spare time
begins three year medical internship at hospitals in New York City
continues to write and maintains close friendships
with other young artists and poets. 
studies medicine in Germany and travels through Europe. His first verse collection poems
is printed and published by a friend. it sells only four copies. begins his medical
practice in Rutherford NJ specializing in pediatrics and obstetrics. Marries
Florence Flossie Herman 

purchases a house at Nine Ridge Road in Rutherford which serves
as both his home and his office
First son William Eric Williams is born
Writes famous poem The Great Figure which later becomes the inspiration for 
Charles Demuth's painting I Saw the Figure in Gold
Second son Paul Herman Williams is born
Meets and befriends poet Marianne Moore who shares Williams's interests in 
both poetry and science
joins the Passaic General Hospital staff but continues his private practice
Publishes Collected Poems by this time Williams has published books of poetry
and prose
Continues to create poetry and prose based on everyday scenes and the common
working class experience of his patients. Publishes eight more books of poetry
and prose including White Mule and Life along the Passaic River
Publishes first of five books of his epic poem Paterson. Others follow in and
Williams suffers a heart attack. Continues to write but reduces his medical 
duties. Son William Eric joins his practice
Receives the National Book Award for his Selected Poems and for Paterson Book Three
several strokes leave him unable to pursue his medical duties. He recovers
well enough to pursue new writing projects and to lecture. named consultant
in poetry to the library of Congress
Despite fragile health williams continues to write. he receives and mentors 
younger poets at his home including Robert Creeley, James Wright, Galway Kinnell
Robert Lowell, Alan Ginsberg, and Denise Levertov. 
Publishes his book and his last poetry collection Pictures from Brueghel
March William Carlos Williams dies at his home in Rutherford. In May he is
posthumously awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Pictures in Brueghel.

World Events During time
John Pemberton invents coca-cola
Gottleib Daimler builds the world's first four wheeled motor vehicle
First radio receiver successfully received radio transmission
Orville and Wilbur Wright fly the first airplane
Color photography invented
first model car sold
talking motion pictures invented 
world war begins
word war ends
charles lindbergh crosses the atlantic ocean non-stop
stock market crashes
world war begins
electronic digital computer invented
modern color television system invented
US enters 
Us drops atomic bomb on Hiroshima ends
Sputnik orbits the earth
John Kennedy President of the United States is assassinated. 

