all the small poems and fourteen more

porches

On the front porch Chairs sit still; The table will receive Summer drinks; They wait, arranged, Strange and polite.
On the back porch Garden tools spill; An empty basket Leans to one side; The watering can Rusts among friends.
Cow
The cow Coming Across the grass Moves Like a mountain Toward us; Her hipbones Jut
Like sharp Peaks Of stone, Her hoofs Like dropped Rocks: Almost Too late She stops.
Zinnias

Zinnias, stout and stiff, Stand no nonsense: their colors Stare, their leaves Grow straight out, their petals Jut like clipped cardboard, Round, in neat flat rings.
Even cut and bunched, Arranged to please us In the house, in water, they Will hardly wilt- I know Someone like zinnias; I wish I were like zinnias.
chairs

Chairs
Seem
To
Sit
Down
On
Themselves, almost as if They were people,
Some fat, some thin; Settled comfortably
On their own seats, Some even stretch out their arms TO
Rest.
sun

The sun Is a leaping fire Too hot
To go near, But it will still Lie down In warm yellow squares On the floor Like a flat Quilt, where The cat can curl And purr.
coins

Coins are pleasant To the hand: Neat circles, smooth, A little heavy.
They feel as if They are worth something.
aquarium

Goldfish
Flash
Gold and silver scales; They flick and slip away Under green weed-But round brown snails Stick
To the glass And stay.
pig 
The pig is bigger Than we had thought And not so pink, Fringed with white Hairs that look Gray, because while They say a pig is clean, it is not always; still, We like this huge, cheerful, Rich, soft-bellied beast-It wants to be comfortable, And does not care much How the thing is managed.
jewels

In words, in books, Jewels blaze and stream Out of heaped chests Or soft, spilled bags: Diamonds, sharp stars, Polished emerald tears, Amethysts, rubies, opals Spreading fire-surfaced pools, Pearls falling down In foam-ropes, sparks Of topaz and sapphire strewn Over a dark cave-floor-How dim, then, the ring Worn on the finger, With one set stone.
tractor

The tractor rests In the shed, Dead or asleep, But with high Hind wheels Held so still We know It is only waiting, Ready to leap-Like a heavy Brown Grasshopper.
grass

Grass on the lawn Says nothing: Clipped, empty, Quiet.
Grass in the fields Whistles, slides, Casts up a foam Of seeds,
Tangles itself With leaves: hides Whole rustling schools Of mice.
dog

Under a maple tree The dog lies down, Lolls his limp Tongue, yawns, Rests his long chin Carefully between Front paws; Looks up, alert; Chops, with heavy Jaws, at a slow fly, Blinks, rolls On his side, Sighs, closes His eyes: sleeps All afternoon In his loose skin.
raw carrots

Raw carrots taste Cool and hard, Like some crisp metal.
Horses are Fond of them, Crunching up The red gold With much wet Juice and noise.
Carrots must taste To horses As they do to us.
marbles

Marbles picked up Heavy by the handful And held, weighed, Hard, glossy, Glassy, cold, Then poured clicking, Water-smooth, back To their bag, seem Treasure: round jewels, Slithering gold.
clock

This clock Has stopped, Some gear Or spring Gone wrong-Too tight, Or cracked, Or choked With dust; A year Has passed Since last It said Or
Poor Clock.
duck

When the neat white Duck walks like a toy Out of the water On yellow rubber-skinned feet, And speaks wet sounds, Hardly opening His round-tipped wooden Yellow-painted beak, And wags his tail, Flicking the last Glass water-drops From his flat china back, Then we would like To pick him up, take Him home with us, put him Away, on a shelf, to keep.
daisies

Where the dusty lane Wound dull and plain Among blind weeds, Today daisies Have opened a petal Decorated way For us to walk; The two fluttering, white Fringed, golden-eyed banks Seem wide celebrations-As if earth were glad To see us passing here.
pie

After the yellow-white Pie dough is rolled out Flat, and picked up Drooping like a round Velvet mat, fitted gently Into the dish, and piled With sliced, sugared, Yellow-white apples, Covered with still another Soft dough-blanket, The whole thing trimmed And tucked in tight, then It is all so neat; so Thick and filled and fat, That we could happily Eat it up, even Before it is cooked.
frog

The spotted frog Sits quite still On a wet stone; He is green With a luster Of water on his skin; His back is mossy With spots, and green Like moss on a stone;
His gold-circled eyes Stare hard
Like bright metal rings; When he leaps He is like a stone Thrown into the pond; Water rings spread After him, bright circles Of green, circles of gold.
pebbles

Pebbles belong to no one Until you pick them up- Then they are yours.
But which, of all the world's Mountains of little broken stones, Will you choose to keep? The smooth black, the white, The rough gray with sparks Shining in its cracks? Somewhere the best pebble must Lie hidden, meant for you If you can find it.
hollyhocks

Hollyhocks stand in clumps By the doors of old cottages.
Even when one springs alone, Lost, in an uncut field,
It builds beside it the cottage, The garden, the old woman, the beehive.
cat

The spotted cat hops
Up to a white radiator-cover As warm as summer, and there, Between pots of green leaves growing, By a window of cold panes showing Silver of snow thin across the grass, She settles slight neat muscles Smoothly down within Her comfortable fur,
Slips in the ends, front paws, Tail, until she is readied, Arranged, shaped for sleep.
fence

The old fence Has fallen down, A pile of gray Rails resting In the grass.
Where are all The cows now, That leaned Hard there, Hoping to get out? Have they pushed Through, and walked Down the road, Past all fences Forever?
crickets

Crickets Talk In the tall Grass All Late summer Long.
When Summer Is gone, The dry Grass Whispers Alone.
more small poems
magnifying glass

small grains In a stone Grow edges That twinkle; The smooth Moth's wing Sprouts feathers Like shingles; my thumb is wrapped in rich satin wrinkles
kitten

The black kitten, Arched stiff, Dances sidewise from behind the chair, leaps, tears away with ears back, spins, lands crouched flat on the floor, sighting something at nose level, 

Her eyes round As oranges, her Hind legs marking Time: then she Pounces, cactus Clawed, upon A strayed Strand of fluff: Can anyone Believe that she Doesn't ask us To laugh?
Safety Pin      

Closed, it sleeps
on its side
Quietly
the silver
image
of some
small fish
opened, it snaps
its tail out
like a thin
shrimp, and looks
at the sharp
point with a 
surprised eye.

earthworms

Garden soil, Spaded up, Gleams with Gravel-glints, Mica-sparks, and Bright wet Glimpses of Earthworms Stirring beneath: Put on the palm, Still rough With crumbs, They roll and Glisten in the sun As fresh As new rubies Dug out of Deepest earth
lawnmower

The lawnmower Grinds its teeth Over the grass, Spitting out a thick Green spray; Its head is too full Of iron and oil To know What it throws Away: The lawn's whole Crop of chopped Soft,
Delicious Green hay.
sparrow

Nothing is less 
Rare than 
One dust 
Colored sparrow
In a driveway 
Minding her own 
Matters, pottering 
Carelessly, finding 
Seeds in the tire-
Flattened weeds:

But because 
She can dare
To let us watch her 
There, when all
The stately robins
Have fled 
Scolding into 
The air, she 
Is as good a bird 
As anyone needs.
magnet

This small Flat horseshoe Is sold for
A toy: we are Told that it Will pick up pins And it does, time After time; later It lies about, Getting its red Paint chipped, being Offered pins less Often, until at Last we leave it Alone: then
It leads its own Life, trading Secrets with The North Pole, Reading Invisible messages From the sun.
lions

Bars, wire,
Glass, and rails, and 
Even two men 
Washing down 
The concrete cells 
Toward gutter tiles 
Where the water 
Flows away, 
Cannot keep 
From the aisles 
The harsh gold 
Smell of lions, 
Luckily: otherwise 
They could be heavy 
Puppets of plush-
Covered clay.
acorn

An acorn
Fits perfectly
Into its shingled
Cup, with a stick 
Attached 
At the top, 
Its polished 
Nut curves 
In the shape 
Of a drop, drawn 
Down to a thorn 
At the tip,
And its heart 
Holds folded 
Thick white fat 
From which 
A marvelous 
Tree grows up: 
I think no better 
Invention or 
Mechanical trick 
Could ever 
Be bought 
In a shop.
caterpillar

The feet of the 
Caterpillar 
Do not patter 
As he passes 
Like the clever 
Quick paws 
Of the squirrel, 
But they ripple, 
Stepping one pair 
After another 
And another, 
And they travel 
With his whole 
Long caravan 
Of bristles 
Down the brown 
Twig, to a 
Greener midsummer 
Dinner.
fireworks

First
A far thud,
Then the rocket
Climbs the air,
A dull red flare,
To hang, a moment,
Invisible, before
Its shut black shell cracks
And claps against the ears,
Breaks and billows into bloom, Spilling down clear green sparks, gold spears, Silent sliding silver waterfalls and stars.
Flamingo 
The flamingo Lingers A long time over one pink leg

Later He ponders upon The other For A While Instead.
hose

The hose Can squeeze Water to A silver rod That digs Hard holes In the mud, Or, muzzled Tighter by The nozzle, Can rain Chill diamond Chains Across the yard,

Or, fanned Out fine, Can hang A silk Rainbow Halo Over soft fog.
mosquitO

There is more to a mosquito Than her sting Or the way she sings In the ear: There are her wings As clear As windows, There are the sleek Velvets on her back; She bends six Slender knees, And her eye, that Sees the swatter, Glitters.
shoes

Which to prefer? Hard leather heels, Their blocks carved Thick, like rocks, Clacked down Waxed wood stairs, Or the pale soles Of sneakers, Worn smooth, soft As mushroom caps, Supple upon warm Summer pavements?
sea lions

The satin sea lions Nudge each other Toward the edge Of the pool until They fall like Soft boulders Into the water, Sink down, slide In swift circles, Twist together And apart, rise again Snorting, climb Up slapping Their flippers on The wet cement: Someone said That in all the zoo Only the sea lions Seem happy.
sidewalks

Sidewalks wear out; Some sunk squares, Winter-cracked, Even break: Then their chunks Tip up To trip old women, Scrape the bare Big toe, stop Skates that rolled  before, And slow them To step around.
crab

The dead crab Lies still limp on dry sand, all strength to crawl gone from his hard shell- but he keeps a shape of old anger curved along his claws
weeds

In the rough places, Along concrete curbs, up railroad banks, Next to brick buildings, Weeds will grow; And no one cares If they live there, Year after year: Quietly attending To roots, stalks, Or even, above Dusty leaves, a few Dim stars of flowers.
haunted house

Its echoes,
Its aching stairs, Its doors gone stiff At the hinges, Remind us of its Owners, who Grew old, who Died, but
Who are still Here: leaning In the closet like That curtain rod, Sleeping on the cellar Shelf like this Empty jelly jar.
toad

When the flowers Turned clever, and Earned wide Tender red petals For themselves, When the birds Learned about feathers, Spread green tails, Grew cockades On their heads, The toad said: Someone has got To remember The mud, and I'm not proud.
pumpkin

After its lid Is cut, the slick Seeds and stuck Wet strings Scooped OUt, Walls scraped Dry and white, Face carved, candle Fixed and lit, Light creeps Into the thick Rind: giving That dead orange Vegetable skull Warm skin, making A live head To hold its Sharp gold grin.
Christmas Lights

Bulbs strung along Our porch roof Pour clear Colors through the Cold black air; But our neighbors Have a spruce, like A huge shadow, Full of deep blue Mysterious stars.
dinosaurs

Dinosaurs do not count, Because They are all Dead: None of us Saw them, dogs Do not even Know that They were there But they Still walk About heavily In everybody's Head.
soap bubble

The soap bubble's Great soft sphere Bends out of shape On the air, Leans, rounds again, Rises, shivering, heavy, A planet revolving Hollow and clear, Mapped with Rainbows, streaming, Curled: seeming A world too splendid To snap, dribble, And disappear.
still more small poems
door

My grandmother's Glass front door Held a fancy pattern Of panes, their Heavy edges cut On a slant: when Sun shone through, They scattered Some eighty little Flakes of rainbows Into the room, Walking the walls, Glowing like fallen Flowers on the floor; Why don't they Make front doors that Way any more?
kite

The kite, kept Indoors, wears Dead paper On tight Boned wood, Pulls at the tied Cord only By its weight

But held To the wind, It is another thing, Turned strong, Struck alive, Wild to be torn Away from the hand Into high air: Where it rides, alone, glad, a small clear wing, having nothing at all to do with string.
turtle

The turtle Does little But sleep On a stone, Alone In his glass Bowl.
Is he bored
By it all?
Does he hope  
Something will happen, 
After a hundred 
Naps?

Or is it enough 
To wake 
Quietly, 
Shawled 
In the shade 
Of his Shell?
compass

According to The compass, Wherever you happen To stand, North, south, East and west, Meet in the palm Of your hand.
bell

By flat Of tin, or thin Copper tong, Brass clang, Bronze bong, The bell gives Metal a tongue-To sing In one sound Its whole song.
pigeons

The pigeon shed 
Is hot, and smells 
Of dust and corn;  
Pigeon-voices 
Bubble, wings scuffle
Above our heads; 
We are allowed 
To touch the throats 
Of the young squabs: 
They sink and shift 
Like beanbags, heavy 
With grain, and warm.
honeycomb

Sealed wax cells
Dull the honey's gold
and hold it stiff and still

the bees build well,
but the hidden honey
only waits to spill-

to glitter out free,
and spread itself everywhere,
the way honey will.
rags

Stuffed away into 
An old pillowcase, 
Dragged forth again 
In crumpled clods, 
Torn to wash windows 
Or tie up tomato plants, 
Thrown out at last-
Poor sad gray wads 
That once were faithful 
Flannel pajamas, 
Favorite pink-
Flowered underpants.
barefoot

after that tight
Choke of sock
And blunt 
Weight of shoe, 
The foot can feel 
Clover's green 
Skin
Growing, 
And the fine 
Invisible 
Teeth 
Of gentle grass, 
And the cool 
Breath 
Of the earth 
Beneath.
mushroom

The mushroom pushes Its soft skull Up through the soil, Spreads its frail Ribs into full Pale bloom, And floats, A dim ghost, Above the tomb Where an oak's Old dust lies Flourishing still.
pail

A new pail, 
straight, tight, 
Brushed to a cold 
silver shine, 
Soon learns 
Other ways: 
Once filled with 
Oats or ashes, 
Grayed by rain, 
Its handle 
Bent, its 
Bottom dented, 
Grown peaceful 
And plain, 
It becomes 
A real pail.
horse

In the stall's gloom, His back, curved Like a high sofa, Turns on unseen Legs, looms closer, Until his long Head forms above The door, his face Of thin silk over Bone: to be stroked Carefully, like Fine upholstery On a hard chair.
back yard

Sun in the back yard Grows lazy,
Dozing on the porch steps All morning,
Getting up and nosing About corners,
Gazing into an empty Flowerpot,
Later easing over the grass For a nap,
Unless
Someone hangs out the wash

Which changes
everything to a rush and a clap Of wet
Cloth, and fresh wind And sun
Wide awake in the white sheets.
rosebush

In summer it Blooms out fat And sweet as milk; In winter it Thins to a bitter Tangle of bones; And who can say Which is the True rosebush?
slug

The slug Slides sly By night, To nibble The new Green shoot, To riddle The weak White root
Hated by all but the moon,
Who smiles On his scenes Of crime, And silvers His trails Of slime.
rocks

They say, No Life on the moon, Not much, if Any, on Mars-But I say, See those Rocks: how They stand up Shapely against The dust, in Their subtle Limbs and skins, Showing a Live mineral Cleverness, just Like rocks here.
cat bath

In the midst Of grooming Her inner Thigh, Her leg Locked High at Her back, She looks Up with A pink Crescent Tongue Left Between lip And lip.
tom

old Tom comes along The room In steps Laid down Like cards, Slow-paced But firm, All former Temptations Too humdrum To turn Him from His goal: His bowl.
roadside

Beside the road, Narrow strips of Field still run, Full of pale Grass, thin scrub, Scrap and rust Of things Cast away-
A dead glove, Empty bottle-skulls, A shivering spirit of lost cellophane.
mice

Mice 
Find places 
In places, 

A dark 
Hall behind 
The hall, 

Odd rooms 
That other 
Rooms hide: 

A world 
Inside 
The wide world, 
And space enough, 
Even in 
Small spaces.
stars

While we 
Know they are 
enormous suns, 
Gold lashing 
Fire-oceans, 
Seas of heavy 
Silver flame,

They look as 
Though they could 
Be swept 
Down, and heaped, 
Cold crystal 
Sparks, in one 
Cupped palm.
egg

Somehow the hen, 
Herself all quirk 
And freak and whim, 
Manages to make 
This egg, as pure 
And calm as stone: 
All for the sake 
Of a silly chick, 
Another squawking hen.
Sweets

Here 
is a list
of likely 
words 
to taste:

peppermint,
cinnamon,
strawberry,
licorice,
lime:

strange 
how they manage
to flavor
the paper
page
garbage

The stained, Sour-scented Bucket tips out Hammered-gold Orange rind, Eggshell ivory, Garnet coffee Grounds, pearl Wand of bared Chicken bone: Worked back soon To still more Curious jewelry Of chemical And molecule.
snow

Gardens, fields, The far hills, Lie deathly With white winter, Wide drifts And heavy deeps Made only of Each snowflake fallen, Like these many Still falling, these Few still alive On my sleeve-None anywhere Ever like This one, this Very one.
small poems again
amoeba

Never wondering What shape to take, But with a Slow shrug Making a start In any direction, And then following, Flowing wholeheartedly Into the fluid Mold of the moment.
jacks

The way 
Jacks nest 
Together in 
The hand, 
Or cupped 
Between  
Two palms, 
jingled up.
And thrown, 
Land in a 
Loose starry Cluster,
Seems luxury
enough,
without the further
bliss

of their slender
iridescent
luster
anteater

Imagine overturning 
the teeming anthill
without a qualm,
calmly sweeping
up its angry
inhabitants on a
long sticky tongue,
and swallowing the
lot with relish-
as if those
beady little bodies
made just so many
mouthfuls of red
or black caviar
frost

How does 
The plain 
Transparency 
Of water 
Sprout these 
Lacy fronds 
And plumes 
And tendrils? 
And where, 
Before window
Panes, did 
They root 
Their lush 
Crystal forests, 
Their cold 
Silver jungles?
beetle

As in old 
Mummy-times, 
The scarab 
Beetle keeps 
Its precious 
Innards 
Packed in
A lacquered 
Coffer of 
Curious 
Compartments.
robins

Look how 
Last year's 
Leaves, faded
So gray 
And brown, 
Blunder 
Along 
Like flimsy 
Flightless 
Birds, 
Stumbling
Beak over 
Tail
Before 
The wind.

But no,
Wait: 
Today 
They right
Themselves, 
And turn 
To The 
Stout slate 
And ruddy 
Rust 
Of robins, 
Running 
On steady 
Stems across 
The ground.
kaleidoscope

Only a litter 
Of bright bits, 
Tipped and tumbled 
Over each other 
Until they huddle 
all 
In one corner,

Where their Reflections wake And break into Crystals, petals, Stars: only The tricks of Mirrors, but

still miracles, Like snowflakes shaken from jumbled Clouds, or earth's Rough muddle Jostled to
jewels and flowers.
tiger

The tiger Has swallowed A black sun, In his cold Cage he Carries it still: Black flames Flicker through His fur, Black rays roar From the centers Of his eyes.
mantis

Bowing Such lean And monklike Shoulders, Robed in Such leafily Meek Array, Folding The wrists, And treading So slowly, Can it Really be Wholly Holy,

Pretending to pray, while intending to prey?
seashell

My father's mother Picked up the shell And turned it about In her hand that was Crinkled, glossy and Twined with veins, The fingers rumpled Into soft roses At the knuckles, and She said, "Why did That little creature Take so much trouble To be beautiful?"

asparagus

Like a nest Of snakes Awakened, craning long-necked Out of the Ground: to stand With sharp scaly heads Alert, tasting The air, Taking the sun, Looking around.
telephone poles

Close by, They're stolid Stumps, sweating Black creosote, Scarred with Bolts and tin Numbers, clumsy Old dolts Of lumber;

But wandering Away, they Lean into The cloud's Drift, the Swallow's slant, The graceful Influence of Grass; and

Lifting up Their long Electric lines, They hand Them on And on, in Gestures of Exquisite Gossamer.
starfish

Spined With sparks, Limbed With flames, Climbing The dark To cling And shine Until the Slow tide Turns Again: Not even Knowing What stars Are,

But Even so, The Same.
crows

When the high 
snows lie worn To rags along The muddy furrows, And the frozen Sky frays, drooping Gray and sodden To the ground, The sleek crows Appear, flying Low across the Threadbare meadow To jeer at Winter's ruin With their jubilant Thaw, thaw, thaw!
fleas

Roaming these Furry prairies, Daring every so often to stop And sink a well In the soft pink soil, hoping To draw up a Hasty drop, and Drink, and survive, There's always The threat of those Inexplicable storms, When over the hairy Horizon rages A terrible paw: Descending to Rend the ground, While we scramble Away for our lives.
coat hangers

Open the closet And there they Wait, in a Trim obedient row; Stirred by the Air, they only Touch wires with A vacant jangle; But try to Remove just one, And they suddenly Clash and cling, And fling themselves to the Floor in an Inextricable tangle.

dandelion

Out of Green space, A sun: Bright for A day, burning Away to A husk, a Cratered moon: Burst In a week To dust: Seeding The infinite Lawn with Its starry Smithereens.
heron

Only Fools Pursue Their Prey.
Mine Comes to Me, while I stand and Reflect: Quick silver Visions Swimming into My glassy Reverie,

seized BY a mere Nod of MY wise beak
library

No need even To take out A book: only Go inside And savor The heady Dry breath of Ink and paper, Or stand and Listen to the Silent twitter Of a billion Tiny busy Black words.
octopus

Marvel at the Awful many-armed Sea-god Octopus, And the coiled Elbows of his eager Eightfold embrace; Yet also at his Tapered tender Fingertips, ferrying Their great brow Along the sea floor In solitary grace.
skunk

Sometimes, around Moonrise, a wraith Drifts in through

The open window: A vague cold taint Of rank weeds

And phosphorescent Mold, a hint Of obscure dank Root hollows and Mist-woven paths, pale toadstools and Dark-reveling worms: As the skunk walks By, half vapor, half Shade, diffusing The night's uncanny essence and atmosphere.
water lily

A hundred Shallow green Questions pressed Upon the Silent pool,

Before it Answers all With a single Deep white Syllable.
broom

It starts Out so well, Its flesh Gold straws Cut square, Flared wide, But so often Ends otherwise, With weary Wan bristles
all stubbed to one side
giraffe

How lucky 
To live so high 
Above 
The body, 
Breathing 
At heaven's 
Level, Looking
Sun In the eye; 
while down Below 
The neck's precarious 
stair, Back, belly, 
And legs Take care Of 
themselves,
hardly aware of the head's airy affairs.
flies

Flies wear Their bones On the outside.

Some show dead gray as bones should seem but others gleam dark blue or bright metal green, or a polished copper, mirroring the sun: if all bones shone so, I wouldn't mind going around in my own skeleton
and fourteen more
key
Mute mysterious Token, burnished Metal carved into Grooves and flanges;

Glinting with Clues and codes, Reflecting exactly the Secret of its lock-

But never, until All its clever Little tongues click Round and home,

Will it tell What hides in the shadowy house, the Silent, expectant room.
String

A ball Of string Is neat But dull: Beginning, Middle, And end Are all The same Thing, Thin And pale,

Until unrolled it wriggles into tangles- hinting at knotted parcels, birds' nests and cats' cradles.
garage sale

Coming home, carrying A pair of chipped china Swans, a scuffed Jigsaw puzzle, and a Perfectly good coat That very nearly fits, We could not quite Forget one elderly Cigar box, holding a Few brown iron Bolts and some other Mournful metal bits.

Horse Chestnut
Almost the best Thing about a horse chestnut Is that it just fits the hand, And can be held  hidden, A secret Shining brown in the mind
skeletons

Is it the Curve of their Breezy ribs, the Crook of their Elegant fingers, Their eyeless Eyes, so wide And wise, Their silent Ivory laughter, The frisk and Prance of their Skittering dance with never a pause for breath,

that fill us with such delicious delight, while scaring us half to death
Mud 
mud mixed With a stick To the right Thickness, Not too stiff Nor too full Of rain,
can then be picked up in the hand, soft still cold as a stone and squeezed until it strains
out between the fingers- warmed a bit, but still heavy with earth's rich grit and grain
autumn geese

One long Ragged Thread Unravels The whole World.

Violets

alone or clustered dense, or strewn in solitary constellations, burning pale as dawn or blue as dusk, or sliding even deeper off the edge of purple toward the unseen radiance of darkest light
web 

The spider weaves it, Swinging and switching Her thread, running it Round its frame, Closing the last flat Spaces in, to wait out Her purpose of flies; But at dawn, when It hangs spangled with silver water, frail Crystals of wet light Caught so neatly and Needlessly, it is not Her web, but ours.

doll

her eyes beam full of sweet blue glass, her dainty shallow mouth curves pink; even when her clothes are lost, her curls left in knots, her smile remains the same I think
potatoes 
Because of each Knob and knot, Hump and dimple And dusty gnarl, No potato is quite Like any other-Until all are pared Smooth and pale, Boiled tender, and Mashed up together: A single soft beauty In their bowl.

July

the heat bloomed with damp tacky to the touch like petunia stems or the nap on a ripe peach
pocket

These things might go Into the pocket: Sea-stones, A bright Beetle, Knitted circles of Queen Anne's Lace; These things come out of the pocket: Sand, splinters, Scraps Of paper creased and soft As an old Face.
book

Such a Bountiful Box of Tricks: Packed With the Five senses, The seven Seas, the earth's four winds and corners All fitted Exactly in.