Ant Cities 
Have you seen ants busy running over a hill of dirt? They may look like they are just running 
around. But the ants built that hill to live in and each ant has work to do. 
Some ants may disappear into a small hole in the hill. 
The hole is the door to their nest. 
These are harvester ants. Their nest is made of lots of rooms and tunnels. 
These little insects made them all. 
Underneath the hill there may be miles of tunnels and hundreds of rooms. 
The floors are worn smooth by thousands of ant feet. 
It is dark inside the nest. But the ants stay cozy. 

when it is sunny the top of the nest gets warm
when it rains water runs off the hill
it if gets too wet near the top of the nest the ants move below
in winter the ants hibernate in a deep room away from the cold they 
stay together in a ball to keep warm


In the rooms of the nest worker ants do many different kinds of work. 
It is like a city a busy city of ants. 
Some ants have brought in food to the ant city. 
These harvester ants like seeds. 
A worker ant cracks the husks off the seeds. 
Another worker will take the husks outside to throw away. 
The ants chew the seeds to get the juices out. 
Then they feed the juices to the other ants. 
Other workers store seeds for the ants to eat another time. 
Not all ants store food. 
But harvester ants do. 

In one room of the nest a queen ant lays eggs. 
Workers carry the eggs away to other rooms to take care of them. 
Each ant city has to have at least one queen. 
Without a queen there would be no ant city. 
All the other ants in the ant city grow from the eggs the queen lays. 
At first the tiny eggs grow into larvae. 
The worker ants feed the larvae and lick them clean so they will grow well. 
The larvae grow into pupae. The workers keep grooming the pupae until they grow into adults. 
The queen ant lays thousands and thousands of eggs. 
Most of the eggs grow into worker ants. 
There may be only one queen ant in an ant city but there can be thousands of workers. 

queen The queen is usually bigger than the other ants she lays eggs that grow into 

worker new queens males. 
workers are all females they do the work in the ant city
they will also fight to protect the nest
new queens have wings they use them to fly away to try to start new ant
cities their wings drop off and then the queens lay eggs
males don't live in the nest for long they fly away with the new queens to mate then they die


The queen doesn't tell the workers what to do. 
But the workers are busy. 
Each ant has work to do. 
Ants work together to keep the whole ant city alive. 

queen ants and males flying off to mate
workers with larvae
workers with pupae bringing in food
carrying eggs to the nurseries carrying husks to throw away outside
collecting seeds and insects for food
queen with workers storing seeds
worker resting carrying dirt out of the nest sharing food digging new tunnel winter room



Workers make the nest bigger by digging new rooms and tunnels. 
They use their feet to dig like tiny dogs. 
Workers pick up pieces of dirt in their jaws and beards and carry them outside. 

Dirt from the digging is what makes the anthill. 
Ants are great diggers and builders. 
Imagine all the tiny pieces of dirt it takes to build a hill two feet high. 

harvester ants' hills can be two feet high and six feet across
many other ants build smaller hills


Out around the harvester anthill workers look for food. 
Harvester ants mostly eat seeds but sometimes they eat insects too. but sometimes
they eat insects too

Ants can bite and sting other insects to capture them or to protect themselves. 
Be careful because some kinds of ants can bite or sting you too. 
Harvester ants will bite or sting if you disturb their nest. 
Ants use their antennas to help them find food. 
They touch and smell with their antennas. 

antennas 
comb on legs for cleaning antennas
cleaning antennas
ants talk to each other by touching antennas

If one ant finds food others follow. 
Soon there will be a lot of ants carrying away lunch. 
If one ant cannot carry something others may help. 
But each worker ant is strong. 
An ant can lift as much as fifty times its own weight. 
If people could lift like that we could each lift a car. 

The workers carry the food back to the ant city. 
Ants share the food they find. 

Ants eat many foods but different kinds of ants like different foods. 
There are over kinds of ants. 

formica ants mostly eat juices that they suck from insects they kill
cornfield ants like to eat the sweet juices or honeydew they get from 
aphids aphids suck the juices from plants then the ants milk the aphids
for honeydew

carpenter ants especially like sweet juices they can get from insects and from 
plants too

thief ants eat sweets and other foods they find in people's houses and lying about 
leaf cutting ants parasol ants make underground gardens with leaves they cut
they grow mushrooms in the gardens for food

army ants travel in large groups like armies they devour huge numbers of insects
including termites
doorway to janitor ants' nests

The different kinds of ants have found many ways to make their cities so they can live in 
many kinds of places. 
Janitor ants make their nests in hollowed out tree twigs. 
The soldier janitor ant a kind of worker ant 
has a big plug shaped head it can use for a door. 
Many kinds of ants make hills or mounds. 
If you haven't seen harvester anthills maybe you've seen the round topped hills that 
Formica ants make. Sometimes they cover their hills with thatch. formica ant
Or you may have seen pavement ants. 
They can live under the sidewalk. Or carpenter ants who build their nests in rotting wood. 
There are small ant cities with just a few ants 
there are big ant cities with many many ants. 
Ants have been found at the tops of the highest buildings and on ships at sea. 
Ants can make their cities almost anywhere. Look around and you'll probably 
find an ant city busy with ants. 

find out more about ant cities
if you want to watch ants close up try making a simple ant farm you can collect ants yourself
if you want your farm to last a long time be sure to include a queen
collecting jar
fill to about here
lid of jar with holes punched in it
remember when you collect any ants to be very careful some ants can bite or sting 
lid with holes
sponge 
food dirt between two flat pieces of glass and plastic
tape screen
or you might want to make or buy an ant farm like this

sift dirt into a jar
then put the ants in
put a little bit of damp sponge into the jar so the ants have something to drink
if you put the water right into the jar the ants might drown
put a little food in the jar
too much food or the wrong food will not be good for the ants
remember some ants like seeds some like other insects
some like sweets try to see what the ants are eating where you collect them
now you have an ant farm 
keep it in a dark place so the ants will live the way they do underground
take the jar into the light and you can watch the ants