Are you a dragonfly? 

Are you a dragonfly? If you are, your mother laid her eggs in the stems of water plants.
You swam out of one of them-and so did lots of others just like you. You are very small. You are very hungry. And guess what? You can breathe water through the end of your tail.
Eat and grow. Eat tiny water creatures.
You have a special grabber for catching them. It's called a mask because it covers half your face. Creep up on your prey- then shoot out your mask and grab it.
Eat and grow until your skin is so tight you have to take it off. Then eat and grow some more, and do it again.
and again. and again. don't worry, there will always be new skin underneath.
now that you have grown larger, you can eat larger food. try a tadpole or a small fish. But be careful- there are plenty who would like to eat you. beware of water beetles. water 
beetles pounce!
beware of ducks. ducks dive,  and they're big.
two years have passed. you're bored of life in the water. crawl up a plant stem into the air. do this at night so birds don't see you and eat you. hold on tight. as you dry,
you skin splits one more time.
slowly, slowly, climb out of your old skin. first pull your head free. then pull your legs free. flop over backward and rest. 
now lean forward, grab your old skin, and pull your whole body out. guess what? now you can breathe air through tiny holes on the sides of your body. 
you're a dragonfly! At first you're very pale and crumpled. But your beautiful colors will come, and your two pairs of wings will straighten out. you're a fantastic flyer.
you can fly fast, you can hover, you can even fly backward. 
you have enormous eyes. you can see all around you, all the time. you can see what's behind you, in front of you, above you, below you, and beside you. 
this is very useful when you're looking for food. this is also very useful when you are dodging hungry birds and avoiding spider's webs. 
you were a fierce hunter underwater- now you are a fierce hunter in the air. Hunt over ponds and streams and slow-flowing rivers. hunt over marshes and in forests. 
hold your legs out in front of you to catch your prey. hunt midges and mosquitoes, flies, wasps, and small butterflies. when you catch something, eat it.
you are a hawker- you hunt while you're flying. this dragonfly is a darter- it sits still until it sees its prey, then it darts out and grabs it. 
this is not a dragonfly at all. it's a damselfly. it's thinner and lighter and slower than you. it likes to pick small insects off leaves and flowers. 
now look around you. if you and all your friends look a little like this or this
or this you are not a dragonfly. you are...
...a human child. you can't fly. you can't breathe underwater.
it's very unlikely that you have a mask attached to your face. 
but you can do a lot of things that dragonflies can't do. you don't have to keep taking your skin off, and you don't have to eat midges and mosquitoes.
best of all, you'll never, ever, ever be eaten by a duck.

did you know... 
...there are more than 4800 different kinds of dragonflies.
...dragonflies are among the oldest winged insects. They've been on the earth for about 300 million years- long before the dinosaurs.
...dragonflies have two pairs of wings. they can beat each pair separately, which is why they are such great flyers.
...dragonflies usually rest with their wings spread out, but damselflies usually fold their wings above their backs, the way butterflies do.





