are you a grasshopper

If you are your mother looks like this. 
Your father looks much the same. 

Your mother laid her eggs at the end of the summer. 
She laid them deep in the grass just under the ground and covered them in frothy stuff. 
The froth hardened into a pod to keep the eggs safe. 


You and your brothers and sisters slept in your eggs all winter but now it's spring. 
Time to hatch push all together to get out of the pod. 

You look a little like a tiny worm but that's only because you are wrapped in a worm shaped 
covering. So unwrap yourself. 
You're still tiny and you don't have any wings but now you look like a grasshopper. 

You're hungry so eat. Eat grass or maybe some leaves. Clover's nice. 
Eat and grow unfortunately your skin is hard so it doesn't grow with you. 
You'll have to take it off. Luckily there's a new one underneath. 

Eat and grow and change your skin again. Now you have wing buds on your back. 

Change your skin again. 

Now you have small stubby wings. 

Eat and grow and change your skin at least four times. The final skin change is the slowest 
and the biggest. 

Struggle out of your old skin and hang from a grass stem. 
While your wings grow to full size. 

At last you are a fully grown grasshopper. You're bigger and stronger than before. 
You have six legs two pairs of wings two large eyes and two short feelers. 

You have tiny ear holes on the sides of your body above your back pair of legs. 

On your feet you have suction pads so you can cling to stems. 

Beside your mouth you have palpi like tiny fingers to help push in your food. 

This is a bush cricket. You can tell it's a cricket and not a grasshopper because it has long 
feelers. Don't stand around looking at it. It may be eating a lead right now but bush 
crickets eat grasshoppers too. 

Don't get caught in a spider web. Spiders eat grasshoppers. 

Don't get too close to a frog or a toad. Frogs and toads eat grasshoppers. 
watch out for birds. Some birds eat grasshoppers too. 
It's a dangerous world out there in the grass. 

always be ready to escape from danger. You could fly except you're not very good at flying. 
you could hide
You're very difficult to see if you creep down among the grass stems. 
Or you  could hop. After all are you a grasshopper. 

Your strong back legs are bent up. Straighten them suddenly and you'll be catapulted 
through the air. You can jump amazingly high and travel an amazingly long way. 

You're very light and your skin is like a suit of armor. You won't hurt yourself when you 
land. You have a row of tiny pegs on the inside of each leg. Pedal your legs up and down fast. 

The pegs rub against your wings and make a ticking chirping noise. 

Keep going for about twenty seconds. Have a break then start again. 

If you are a male grasshopper chirp loudly to attract  mate. 

If you are a female grasshopper you can chirp back if you want to. 

The important thing is to mate and lay eggs for next year. 

However if your mother and father look like this or this. Or this you are not a grasshopper 
you are a human child. You don't have wings. You don't have feelers. You don't have ears in 
the sides of your body. You probably can't jump amazingly high. 

Don't worry you can do many things a grasshopper can't do. 

Best of all you can make music without pedaling your legs up and down. 

Did you know the grasshoppers in this book are common green grasshoppers but there are 
more than 7000 different kinds of grasshoppers. 
Also they are closely related to crickets stick insects cockroaches and earwigs.
 A grasshopper can jump 20 times the length of its own body. 

The locust is a large tropical grasshopper that is very good at flying. 

A swarm of locusts can eat a whole field of crops in one nights. 

Most grasshoppers die at the end of the summer after they've laid their eggs. 
