
beauty and the beast

once upon a time there lived a merchant's daughter so lovely and kind
that all who knew her called her beauty

Beauty lived with her father and two sisters in wealth and with-out worry. Then 
suddenly their father lost everything when his ships, laden with riches, vanished 
at sea. The family, now penniless, fled to a country cottage. There they had to do 
all the work themselves. Beauty's sisters cried and grumbled, but Beauty worked on 
bravely and tried to comfort her father. One day, news came that one of the ships had
had survived. Before leaving for the port, the merchant asked his daughters what
they missed most so that he could bring each of them a present.

The first sister asked for beautiful gowns. The second sister asked for a coach and 
four horses. Beauty asked only for a rose, since the cottage garden was filled with
cabbages.

Upon reaching the ship, the merchant found the cargo spoiled and worthless. Poorer 
than ever, he headed home through a deep forest until snow covered the path and he was
lost. Just when he was too tired to go on, he saw an avenue of orange trees, untouched
by the snow, and beyond them a grand palace. He rode toward it, hoping for shelter.

Ornate doors opened wide and the merchant entered a great hall. Strangely, he saw no 
one, neither master nor servant.  But a sumptuous hot meal waited on the table. He 
ate and fell sound asleep in his chair. In the morning he woke up and found fresh
new clothes and a breakfast of delicious fruits and steaming tea waiting for him. he
ate quickly and went outside, where a magnificent horse, all fitted out, stood waiting
to take him home.

Just as the merchant was about to mount the horse, he spied a bed of roses. Remembering 
his promise to Beauty, he knelt and picked one. Immediately he heard a dreadful angry
roar. He looked up and saw a fearsome beast standing above him. "how dare you harm my
roses?" the Beast cried. "A rose that is cut can only die. You shall pay for your 
ingratitude with your life!" "I have taken the rose only as a gift for one of my 
daughters, the faithful Beauty," the terrified merchant pleaded.

The Beast glared at him. "I will spare your life, but only if one of your daughters
willingly returns in your stead," he growled. "I cannot send you a daughter," the
merchant told the Beast. "but I promise I will return after I bid them good-bye."

The merchant arrived home and gave Beauty the rose. But it was a somber homecoming as
he told the grim story of the Beast and his cruel punishment. Beauty would not hear 
of her father's return to the palace and certain death. He would never have plucked the
rose if it were not for her. She would go to the palace and nothing her father said
could dissuade her.

When Beauty and her father reached the palace, the ornate doors opened once again.
Fear took hold of them as they went inside. Suddenly, a fearsome creature, part man,
part animal, moved out of the shadows. Overcoming her terror, Beauty stepped forward
and greeted him. "Good evening, my lord." The Beast ignored her and presented her 
father with a casket containing a fortune in coins and jewels. "You have kept your
promise," he growled. "This will restore your house handsomely. Now be gone." And
he walked off into the darkness.  The merchant bade a tearful farewell to his daughter.
Then the great doors opened and he departed, leaving Beauty quite alone.

Thus Beauty began her new life in the palace. A troop of monkeys in court dress
appeared to serve her. A charming little dog became her page. A beautiful bird led 
Beauty to a magnificent bedchamber filled with all of her favorite things. The Beast 
was nowhere to be seen, and it became clear that she was not in danger. 

Beauty was free to amuse herself in any way she wished. She spent the day wandering
all over the palace and exploring the beautiful gardens, many of them filled with 
exquisite roses.

That evening, she was taken to a candlelight dinner. As animal musicians began to
play, the Beast appeared. Beauty drew back, frightened, but the Beast's courtly 
manners disarmed her fears.

The Beast reassured Beauty with charming conversations until it grew late. Then he
fell silent. At last, he spoke. "Beauty, will you marry me?" Beauty, lowering her 
eyes, replied, "pray, don't ask me that."

The days passed happily for Beauty. She even began to look forward to the evenings and
her conversations with the Beast. His thoughtful ways began to win her trust.

But Beauty dreaded the moment when he took his leave, for he would always ask, 
"Beauty, will you marry me?" It grew more and more painful for her to say, "Pray,
don't ask me."

Then came a day that passed so happily that when the Beast joined her for dinner, 
Beauty spoke of her great joy. "The flowers in the gardens have never been more
beautiful," she told him. "And the musicians have never played more sweetly." 

The Beast again asked for her hand, and with such tender hope she said, "I cannot
marry you, Beast. But I will indeed stay here willingly as long as I shall live, if 
you only will grant me one request. Let me say good-bye to my father and the world
I leave behind."

A mournful look came over the Beast. "Return before the moon is full, faithful Beauty,
or you will break your poor Beast's heart." Then he placed a golden ring on her finger
and said "When you wish to come back, turn this ring three times around and say aloud,
"I want to be in the palace of the Beast again.""

Immediately, Beauty was back in the grand house of her childhood. She watched her
father bartering for goods, and her sisters ordering their maids about, just as
they had always done. Seeing Beauty, they all flew to her in amazement. Her father
embraced her, and her sisters asked question after question about her strange life in
the palace and about the monster who ruled there. Beauty tried to explain her
admiration for the Beast and the wonders of the palace, but even her father did not
understand.

The weeks at home went by in a whirl. Laughing young men coaxed Beauty to go out for 
walks and rides. Her father escorted her to concerts and the opera. Her sisters took
her to fancy balls. Beauty had no time to think of the Beast and she completely forgot
her promise to him.

One night, after much gaiety and dancing, Beauty fell asleep and dreamed that she was
back in the palace garden, now strangely dark and cold. She searched and searched, 
looking for something she had lost. Then she saw the Beast on the ground, still as 
death. Beauty woke up stricken with grief. None of the past weeks meant as much to
her as her life with Beast. She turned the golden ring three times around her finger 
and said aloud, "I want to be in the palace of the Beast again."

At once, Beauty found herself at the palace gates. She ran into the garden and there
she found the still form of her beloved Beast.

Fearing that he might have left this world, Beauty knelt down and took the Beast in
her arms and wept. Her tears, raining down upon his furry head, woke him up, and he
looked at her. "Dearest Beast," she implored, "you must be strong and live so that
we may be husband and wife, for I love you so."

When these words were spoken, stars fell from the sky and the palace was illuminated
as if by a thousand candles.

Before her, Beauty saw the radiant face of a handsome prince. Her promise to marry
the Beast out of love had unlocked a fantastic spell.

Taking Beauty's hand in his, the young prince explained that some years before, a 
meddlesome fairy, displeased with people for judging other by their appearance, 
had cast a spell over the palace and everyone in it.

The servants were changed into animals and the prince was turned into the ugliest 
and most fearsome Beast in the forest. The spell would only be broken when a young
maiden fell in love with the beast and promised to marry him. And that's what Beauty 
had done.

There was much rejoicing within the palace that night, but no one was happier than
Beauty and the prince. They were married that very next day and lived happily ever 
after.
