Bullfrog at Magnolia Circle

Lightning zigzags through the early evening sky over the bayou waters that slowly
wind their way behind the white wooden houses on Magnolia Circle. Thunder rumbles 
in the distance. The croaking of bullfrogs, and the peeps and sounds of other 
frogs, fill the air.

In midwinter, Bullfrog emerged from his muddy winter retreat and silently waited for
the warmth and rains of spring. Now in April, his throat yellow and bulging, he sings
a sound like 
After a summer and a fall as a tadpole and over a year as a youngster, Bullfrog is
now fully grown. Using his long webbed back feet, he swims through the duckweed to 
the edge of the bayou.

As Bullfrog pulls his long body up the bank of the bayou, a crayfish emerges from
a chimney made of mud. In less than half a second, Bullfrog springs forward. His 
long, sticky tongue shoots out and grabs the crayfish.

The crayfish struggles, but Bullfrog uses his front legs to stuff the crustacean 
into his mouth. As he swallows, his large bulging eyeballs sink into his head to
push the crayfish farther down his throat.

Rain cascades from the sky, soaking the earth. In the distance, by the large screened
porch, huge oak trees covered by Spanish moss sway in the warm, heavy air. Bullfrog
hops past the dock. He moves slowly, closing his eyes with each hop as the rain drips
onto his smooth, green skin. 

A bolt of lightning illuminates the sky. A few seconds later, a loud crash of thunder
explodes. The warm, wet evening is perfect for Bullfrog to explore the bayou. 
Tonight he will begin his search for a calling site, and then he can start singing
to attract his first mate.

A sphinx moth flutters past Bullfrog and lands on a blade of a wild weed near 
the water. Bullfrog sees the moth with his big, round eyes. In an instant, his long,
sticky tongue brings the moth into his mouth and it becomes part of his evening 
meal.  

As Bullfrog eats the moth, he does not notice the silent landing of a black-crowned 
heron. But the heron notices Bullfrog. A nice, fat juicy bullfrog would satisfy a
hungry heron.

Ever so slowly, the heron stalks its prey. His neck is pulled back and he is ready 
to make a swift, killing stab. The heron moves slowly closer to unsuspecting 
Bullfrog.

Suddenly, a loud crash by the garage of the house echoes in the night. A fat raccoon
scurries away from the trash can lid she just knocked over. The loud noise startles
both Bullfrog and the heron. Squawking a loud complaint, the heron takes to the air,
leaving Bullfrog behind, unharmed.

The bullfrog, startled by the departing heron, leaps into the water, but soon returns
to the shore. He hears the clicking sounds of the southern cricket frogs in the grass.
One of the little frogs jumps. It lands just in front of Bullfrog. In less than a 
second, it is in Bullfrog's mouth. 

From the booming croaks all around, Bullfrog knows other male bullfrogs are nearby.
While calling for his mate, Bullfrog might have to wrestle with one of these males,
or he might simply do battle with his deep bass voice, calling and calling.

Bullfrog hops back to the water and dives in, landing with a splash. A special 
layer of skin protects Bullfrog's open eyes so he can see underwater. He swims 
farther out into the bayou, through a cluster of water lilies. At the edge of 
the water lilies, he stops. 
He has been searching for a special place. This could be it. In this special 
place he will attract a female bullfrog by calling to her in his deep voice. 
She will come and deposit her eggs.

He rises to the surface, spreads his legs out and floats effortlessly. His 
throat bulges. He croaks again and again. 
The voices of other males join in and a bass chorus fills the air. Soon, 
with luck, a female will hear Bullfrog and come to him. For now he will 
stay close by this spot and call and wait in the bayou waters behind the white
wooden house on Magnolia Circle.












