Can You Survive the Wilderness? an interactive survival adventure


About Your ADVENTURE 
You are lost in the wilderness. Predators roam through the forest. 
Hot days and cold nights will test your strength. High cliffs, rushing rivers, 
and deep gorges will block your way. Any wrong decision could be your last.
How will you survive? In this book you'll deal with extreme survival 
situations. You'll explore how the knowledge you have and the choices you 
make can mean the difference between life and death. Chapter One sets 
the scene. Then you choose which path to read. Follow the links at the 
bottom of each page. After you finish one path, go back and read the 
others.
Use your device's back buttons or page navigation to jump back to 
your last choice. Then try a different link for a new adventure. 
YOU CHOOSE the path you take through your adventure. 

For the best You Choose experience, view in portrait (vertical) orientation. 

CHAPTER 
The Great Wilderness 
Do you have what it takes to survive in the wilderness? Far from 
civilization, everything changes. You can't go to the grocery store or fast- 
food restaurant to pick up a meal. If you're hurt, a doctor isn't just a phone 
call away. If you're cold, you can't just turn up the heat. Even finding safe 
water to drink can be a challenge. 
Exploring the wilderness can be fun if you are prepared. 

Bears, cougars, and other predators can kill you. Poisonous plants can 
be just as deadly. But the wilderness also provides ways to survive. 
Catching fish and small game can keep you alive. Many plants are safe to 
eat들f you know what they are. 

A survival kit can help make the difference between life and death. 

Being lost or stranded in the wilderness will test both your strength 
and your intelligence. How will you find food? How can you get the 
attention of rescue aircraft? What would you do if you were staring down 
the jaws of a hungry predator? 
It won't be easy, but if you stay calm and make good choices, you 
might be able to get out alive. Are you ready to find out whether you have 
what it takes? 
To see if you can survive the Alaskan wilderness, press here. 
To take your chances in the forests of southeastern Australia, press here. 

To try to make it out of the forests of the Cascade Mountains, press here. 

CHAPTER 
Alone in Alaska 
As you watch the August sun dip behind the high mountains of the 
Alaska Range, you are filled with worry. You were supposed to spend two 
nights alone in the Alaskan wilderness before being picked up by a small 
plane. At the time it seemed like a great way to challenge yourself and your 
survival skills. 
But now you realize that coming out here alone was a big mistake. 
Two days has stretched to five days, and what few supplies you brought 
with you have run out. And it seems that no one is coming. Your family 
and friends know you were headed for a solo retreat, but they don't know 
exactly where. 

The Alaska Range stretches 400 miles through southern Alaska. 

Have you been forgotten? Lost in a shuffle of paperwork? Did 
something happen to the pilot who brought you out here? That idea is 
terrifying. The pilot is the only other person who knows exactly where you 
are. Your family and friends knew only that you were coming to Alaska. 
Your food and fresh water may be gone, but you came prepared. Your 
heavy backpack contains a warm sleeping bag and a small fold-up tent. 
You've got warm clothes, a pocketknife, and a piece of flint to start fires. 
What you don't have is a cell phone, radio, or any other way to call for 
help. You're on your own, and it's becoming clear that rescue might not be 
coming any time soon. Civilization may be dozens of miles away or more. 
This isn't a bad place to survive. You've got a lake full of fresh water, plenty 
of wood for fire, and lots of wildlife. 
It's also the last place anyone saw you. But if no one knows where to 
look, there's no guessing how long it might take before you'll be found 
here. It's time to decide do you wait for rescue here? Or is it time to strike 
out into the wilderness in search of help? 
To camp here and wait for rescue, press here. 
To strike out in search of help, press here. 




Shelter and fire will help you survive in the wilderness. 

Alaska is a huge, wild place. You don't even know which direction to 
go to find civilization. Staying here seems like your best chance. You know 
how to survive. You just have to keep yourself alive until someone finds 
you. 

The good news is that you already have a start on a camp here. Your 
tent is set up and you've built a fire ring out of stones. You've even got a 
small kettle for boiling water. And you know the area a little. There are fish 
in the lake and wildlife in the thick forest. With some luck, you could 
survive months out here. 
Your first concern is finding food. You could try fishing, but you'd 
have to make your own gear. Or you could work on building snares to 
catch rabbits or other small game. You know how to build a snare, but 
catching food this way takes lots of patience. 
To fish for your supper, press here. 
To build snares. press here. 

If nobody knows where you are, you could wait here for weeks or 
months before rescue comes if it comes at all. You might survive the 
summer, but winter would surely be the end of you. It's time to move. 
You pack your things. Your backpack is heavy. Reluctantly you decide 
to leave your tent behind to lighten your load. You'll have your sleeping 
bag to keep you warm at night, and you can build shelter. You give your 
camp one last look and head out. 
Mountains lie to your east. The land gradually slopes down to the 
west. You don't know where you might find civilization. 
To head west away from the mountains, press here. 
To head east toward the mountains, press here. 

The steelhead trout is found in Alaska. 

A small stream feeds the nearby lake, and you've seen trout swimming 
there. You find a strong, straight stick and use your pocketknife to whittle 
it to a sharp point. Soon you've got a crude fishing spear. 
The creek isn't very deep, but it's moving fast. At first you try standing 
on the banks, but soon discover that you can't reach far enough to get to 
the fish. So you strip off your shoes and socks roll up your pants, and 
wade in. The water is bitterly cold, but you're not giving up now. 

Spearing a fish proves difficult. You make several attempts, but come 
up empty. Things get worse when you lunge at a trout just out of reach. 
You lose your balance and flop into the icy cold water. The water takes 
your breath away. You gasp and pull yourself up. Your clothing is soaked. 
You shiver in the cool late afternoon breeze. 
To go back to camp to dry your clothes, press here. 
To keep trying to catch fish, press here. 

Rolling Snare 
It's time to get to work on building rolling snares. You learned this 
skill years ago as a Scout. First you need two shaped sticks. You find 
some sapling branches that will be perfect. You insert one shaped stick 
into the ground with the  facing the ground. You then insert the other 
shaped stick into the first to form a trigger. 
You then need to set the snare. You don't have wire or string, so you 
use your shoelaces and cord from your backpack. You tie one end of the 
cord to the top of the second stick and the other to the top of a nearby 
sapling. 
You then make a noose by forming a loop with a shoelace that will 
allow the animal's head to slip through but not its shoulders. You place 
another shaped stick inside the noose to hold it open and tie the other 
end of the lace to the trigger. When an animal slips into the noose, the 
trigger will tighten. The noose will pull around the animal's neck and 
throw the animal into the air, so it can't escape. You make another snare 
farther along the trail, draping leaves over your work for camouflage. 
You spend a hungry night huddled in your sleeping bag. The next 
morning you eagerly go out to see if your snares have worked. 
The first snare is empty. As you head to the second snare, you notice 
movement out of the corner of your eye. It's two small grizzly bear cubs! 
You guess they're only about 6 months old. One notices you, but they don't 
seem too bothered by your presence. You realize what a rare chance this is 
to see them in the wild. 
To move in for a closer look at the cubs, press here. 
To turn around and move away, press here. 

You head west away from the mountains. You know that in a survival 
situation, it's usually best to head downhill. Higher elevations will be 
colder and will support less wildlife. And people tend to settle at lower 
elevations. 
You hike for several days. Your progress is slow but steady. At night 
you stop, build a small lean-to shelter with branches and leaves, and start 
a small campfire. You eat berries and insects. Eating bugs is gross, but 
most are plentiful safe, and loaded with protein. 
Late on your third day of hiking, you stop suddenly in your tracks. 
Ahead of you stands an enormous grizzly bear, and it's staring right at you. 
The bear takes a step in your direction. You have to act quickly! 
To stand your ground, press here. 
To run from the bear, press here. 

You strike out toward the mountains. Your progress is slow. You hike 
until late afternoon and then set up a camp. You build a simple lean-to 
shelter against a large boulder. You start by leaning a dozen sturdy 
branches against the rock face. Next you pile smaller branches, twigs, and 
leaves on top. These will help keep some heat in the shelter and will keep 
you dry if it rains. 
After the work of building your shelter, you don't have time to hunt or 
fish for food. You end up foraging for insects. The forest floor provides 
plenty of ants and grubs to keep you going. Eating them is pretty gross, but 
it's better than starving. 
Day after day, you repeat this routine, covering ground and searching 
for signs of people. But even with your diet of insects, you're growing 
thinner and weaker every day. As you gain elevation, foraging for food 
becomes harder and harder. 
You're just about ready to turn around and go back toward lower 
ground when you hear the sound of an airplane above you. It might be 
part of a rescue effort! You have to get the pilot's attention. You could 
build a signal fire, but that would take some time. Or you could find a 
clearing and try to get the pilot's attention by waving your arms and 
shouting. 
To build a signal fire, press here. 
To find a clearing, press here. 

You may never get a chance like this again. Slowly you take a few 
steps toward the cubs, and then a few more. The cubs still don't seem 
alarmed. You smile as you watch them clumsily wrestle with each other. 
Suddenly, you hear a loud crashing noise coming toward you. You 
turn and see a huge grizzly charging at you! You realize that it's the cubs' 
mother. You freeze for a moment, terrified. You know you've made a 
critical mistake. No one should ever get between a mother bear and her 
cubs! 
Press here. 

Most adult grizzly bears weigh between 350 and 900 pounds. 
As interesting as the cubs may be, you know that you're already too 
close. The mother bear can't be far away, and you don't want her to 
discover you near her cubs! You move away, shouting and waving your 
arms as you move. You know this is a good way to let a bear know you're 
nearby듩obody wants to surprise a 500-pound predator! 
Your heart is racing as you take a long detour to your second snare. 
And you're in luck듳our snare has caught a rabbit! You take the rabbit 
reset the snare, and return to camp. That night, you enjoy a delicious meal. 
Press here. 

You're drenched with near-freezing water. It's critical you get warm 
and dry, even if it means you go hungry tonight. You hurry back to camp 
and strip off your wet clothes. You quickly build a small fire and huddle 
close to it. Slowly the warmth stops your shivering, and soon you climb 
into your sleeping bag for the night. Tomorrow you'll try fishing again. 
Maybe you'll set up snares as well. 
Press here. 

You try to ignore your shivering and get back to work, but you still 
can't catch anything. It's hard to keep your hand steady because you're 
shivering so much. Soon you can't even feel your feet because they re so 
cold. After another hour of trying, you know you have to head back. You're 
so cold, and all you want to do is warm up by a fire. 
When you get back to camp, you're shivering violently. You try to start 
a fire, but your fingers are too numb and clumsy. Desperate to warm up, 
you climb into your sleeping bag. But that's not the answer. It's a long, 
miserable night. With no fire and the cool Alaska night, your body just 
continues to lose heat. To make matters worse, you haven't eaten all day 
and your body is low on energy. 
By morning you're in the grip of severe hypothermia. You're not even 
shivering anymore드 very bad sign. You know you should do something, 
but your mind is cloudy and confused. You can't even make a decision. So 
you just stay there in your sleeping bag. Soon even breathing is a struggle. 
You drift in and out of consciousness. One of these times, you know, you 
won't wake up again. You've failed in your attempt to survive the harsh 
Alaskan wilderness. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

a signal fire is your best chance even if it takes some time you quickly gather
small branches and dry grass for tinder you strike your flint against a rock
for sparks and the tinder catches fire as the fire burns you add larger and 
larger sticks you keep anxiously looking up into the sky for the plane
it's still there but you know your time is running out fast
next you add wet wood and leaves to the fire these wet materials will give off huge
amounts of smoke as they burn by now minutes have passed since you spied the plane
you can't see or hear it anymore. your fire begins to release a tower of smoke into
the sky but is it too late just then you hear the plane again it passes overhead
turns and passes again this time it dips one of its wings toward you the universal
signal that you've been seen you raise your arms in the sky and shout with joy
you're going to live
even though there's no place for the plane to land here you know a rescue
helicopter will be on its way soon. all you have to do is wait your adventure
in the alaskan wilderness will be over soon the end
to follow another path press here
to read the conclusion press here



You rush to a small clearing nearby. You shout and jump and wave, 
doing everything you can think of to get the pilot's attention. But it doesn't 
work. You realize that from the pilot's vantage point, you're nothing but a 
speck. Soon the plane is gone. You break down in tears as you realize 
you've missed a great chance at rescue. 
You can't keep climbing, so you turn around. Soon it feels as if you're 
just wandering aimlessly around the wilderness. Your hunger grows and 
grows. You're getting weak. 
A few days later you stumble over an exposed root, badly twisting 
your ankle. You can barely put any weight on it. You can no longer find 
food or water. It's hard to even gather enough wood for a fire. 
You linger there for days. But with each day, your hopes of rescue 
grow dimmer. Help isn't coming, and you can't survive much longer. With 
a tear, you think of your family and friends. You're sorry that they may 
never know what happened to you. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

Running is the worst thing you could do. A bear's instinct is to chase 
something that runs away. Because grizzlies have poor eyesight, the bear 
might not realize that you aren't an animal. You need to let it know that 
you're a human and that you pose it no threat. 
Your heart is pounding, but you spread your arms to make yourself 
look larger as you speak to the grizzly in a calm, clear voice. "I'm sorry I 
bothered you," you say. "I'll be leaving now." You slowly start to back away 
without making eye contact. The grizzly seems to hesitate. Then it turns 
and wanders off in the opposite direction. 
With a deep sigh of relief, you relax. That was a close one. That night 
you make sure to set up camp far away from where you had your bear 
encounter. 
Two days later you come across a small road. It's the first sign of 
civilization you've seen! You follow the road for most of the morning. 
Around noon you hear the sounds of a vehicle. A pickup truck 
rumbles around a bend. You wave at it, and it slows down. 
"Help!" you shout. "I need help!" 
A man and a young boy step out to help you. "I'm Marvin," the man 
says. "This is my grandson Mitchell. We were out hunting. How'd you get 
out here all by yourself?" 
Marvin and Mitchell are fascinated as you tell them your tale. "Come 
on," Marvin says. "We've got a hunting lodge near here. Let's get you some 
food and a fire. You can use our cell phone to call your family." 
You breathe a sigh of relief and thank your rescuers. You're going to 
be 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

To turn around and move away 
To go back to camp to dry your clothes back back 

Thick Forests can make wilderness rescues difficult.

Over the next week, you sharped your survival skills. You trap several
rabbits, and you even manage  to spear a few fish. You build another fire
pit far from camp and prepare your food there. You know that you're less
likely to attract bears that way.
Then one day you hear a buzzing sound in the distance. It's a small airplane! You
quickly build as large a fire as you can. You pile wet wood and leaves onto the 
fire, knowing they'll produce large amounts of smoke.

Over the next hour, the plane reappears several times. It seems as if it 
might be a search plane looking for you! 
The smoke from your fire does its job. You watch as the plane turns in 
your direction. It's a small seaplane that can land on the nearby lake. 
You're waiting on shore, shouting and waving your arms. You were patient 
and smart, and rescue has finally arrived. You've proven yourself a true 
outdoor survivalist. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

To run from the bear back back 
To move in for a closer look at the cubs 
Following instinct, you turn and run. You realize too late what a 
mistake that was. A bear's instinct is to chase something that runs. You 
only get a few steps away before the bear is upon you. It rises up with a 
terrible roar. A massive paw slams into your head and sends you crashing 
to the ground. The blow knocks you unconscious. That's actually a good 
thing for you. At least that way you don't feel anything as the grizzly mauls 
you. 
The Alaskan wilderness is harsh and unforgiving. You have paid for 
your mistakes with your life. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

CHAPTER 3 
Surviving Down Under 
You're deep in the forests of Australia's Blue Mountains, and nobody 
knows where you are. You were planning to meet your friend Casey at a 
campsite later for some hardcore mountain biking. First, though, you 
decided to take a morning ride on your own. Now you're lost. The 
interesting little trail that you had been following has disappeared, and 
you can't find it again. 
You're not too worried at first. You have your bike, and you're an 
expert rider. There's not much terrain you can't handle. But then your 
front wheel catches a rock. The bike skids out from under you, and you 
smash into the ground. 

The Blue Mountains get their name from a blue haze released by 
eucalyptus trees. 

You're just scraped and bruised but the bike is in far worse shape. 
The front tire is blown out, the chain has snapped, and the rim is bent 
beyond repair. With the damage, the bike is worthless. That leaves you lost 
and alone with nothing but your feet to carry you. Not good. 
You search your backpack and find a first-aid kit. You wipe down your 
scrapes and bandage them. As you look through the pack, you realize 
you're in trouble. You have a bottle of water but no food. You've got a 
small tool kit, a spare inner tube for a bike tire, emergency matches, and a 
windbreaker jacket. 
You stand and scan the horizon. To your back stand the scenic Blue 
Mountains. Ahead lies a thick forest, cut through with sheer cliffs and deep 
valleys. There's no sign of people in any direction. 
With a sigh, you zip up your backpack and start hiking. You head east 
knowing that the coast and civilization lie in that direction. After several 
hours of hiking, your stomach is growling. You can survive a long time 
without food, but you want to keep up your strength. 
You know that the Australian wilderness contains many edible plants. 
But all around, you can hear a variety of birdcalls. It's nesting season, and 
finding eggs wouldn't be too difficult. But getting them could be 
dangerous. 
To forage for wild plants, press here. 
To try to find bird eggs, press here. 

You keep your eyes open for plants that you know are safe to eat, 
including blue flax lilies and warrigal greens. You don't have much luck 
though. 
Your stomach is grumbling when you come across a small shrub with 
large clusters of green and red berries. You don't recognize the plant, but 
it's the closest thing to food you've seen so far. 
You pluck a few of the berries and smell them. They don't have a very 
strong scent. 
To look for something else to eat, press here. 
To eat the berries, press here. 
back back 
Eucalyptus trees are native to Australia and New Guinea. 

Birds are plentiful in this area. And you're in luck, since most are in 
nesting season. You turn your eyes toward the sky and start searching tree 
branches for the telltale signs of a nest. It doesn't take you long to spot one 
sitting about halfway up a eucalyptus tree. It looks like a sturdy tree, but 
you know that climbing in a survival situation is always a big risk. 
Carefully, you work your way up the tree. You take your time, 
knowing that a fall here will likely cost you your life. Soon you've reached 
the branch that holds the nest. But from up here, it doesn't seem like a 
very broad branch. You don't know if it will hold your weight. You could 
shake the branch but you're not sure whether the eggs would survive the 
fall. All your work could be for nothing. 
To try shaking the branch, press here. 
To move onto the branch toward the nest, press here. 
back 
No matter how hungry you are, you're not about to start eating 
mystery berries. That could be a one-way ticket to an early grave! You keep 
searching, and a few minutes later, you're rewarded. There's a ring of 
mushrooms under a large tree. You recognize them as saffron milk caps 
an edible and nutritious species of mushroom. 
You gather several handfuls of the flat, reddish mushrooms and rinse 
them off with a few precious drops of water from your bottle. You know 
they'd taste better cooked, but you don't want to waste the time and effort 
of building a fire. You munch them down uncooked. All that matters is 
that your body is getting energy from the mushrooms. You feel charged 
and ready to go. 
Press here. 

The Australian magpie can live for 25 years. 

You don't trust the branch to support your weight. So instead you 
brace yourself against the tree's sturdy trunk and start to shake the 
branch. You quickly build a rhythm and soon have the end of the branch 
moving back and forth. Finally the nest shakes loose from the tree and 
tumbles to the ground. Success! 
You shimmy down the tree and check the nest. Out of a total of five 
eggs, three are unbroken. They're good-sized eggs, possibly from an 
Australian magpie. They should provide you with much-needed protein 
and energy. 

You gather wood and use your emergency matches to start a small 
fire. Meanwhile, you chip a small hole in the top of each egg. The hole will 
keep the egg from exploding as it cooks. You put out the fire and place the 
eggs on the edge of the hot coals. They're cooked within a few minutes. 
You peel off the shells and munch them down. back

With a little food in your stomach, you feel strong and ready to keep 
going. You move carefully through the thick forest. In places, you have to 
navigate steep drop-offs. Soon you come across a small river. You start to 
follow it downstream. You know that any time you're lost in the 
wilderness, rivers usually lead to civilization. 
As you move alongside the river, the sun dips in the sky. You'll have to 
make camp soon. This side of the river is rocky and rough, but you notice a 
perfect flat location on the far side. It's not a very big river. You think it's 
no deeper than waist level, and the current isn't strong here. You decide to 
cross. 
To strip off your clothes before you cross, press here. 
To stay dressed for the crossing, press here. back 

Nights in this region can be very cold, and you don't want to face one 
with wet clothing. So you strip off every stitch of clothing you own and 
shove it all in your pack. You lift the pack high above your head and start 
across. You're naked except for your shoes. You leave them on because you
don't want to risk cutting your feet on sharp river rocks. 
The water is ice cold. It's also deeper than you expected, and soon 
you're nearly up to your chest. You're lucky the current isn't very strong, or
you'd be swept away. You manage to make it across, but you're shivering 
badly. You quickly pull your clothes out of your pack and get dressed. Next
you gather dry wood and start a fire. You need to get warm as fast as 
possible. You can't afford to get hypothermia out here. 

Wentworth Falls in Australia's Blue Mountains is 614 feet high. 

Within a few hours, you're snoozing by the fire. Even with its warmth 
it's still a long and cold night. But you make it through, and you're off 
again at dawn. As you continue to follow the river, you begin to hear a 
faint roaring, like constant thunder. Soon you see why듮he river tumbles 
over a sheer cliff. It's one of the area's many waterfalls. 
You peer over the cliff and see that it's easily a 50-foot drop. You gasp 
as you notice something else far in the distance a road! If you can get 
down this cliff, you should be able to reach it before sunset! 
To climb down the cliff, press here. 
To try walking another direction, press here. 

You're not willing to just let the nest fall to the ground after all this 
work. You straddle the branch and slowly make your way out. It creaks 
and bends a bit, but seems to be holding. Soon you're only a few feet from 
the nest. You peer inside it and see that it holds five eggs드n excellent 
meal! 
You lean forward to grab the eggs. As you do, you hear a sharp 
CRACK. Before you realize what has happened, you're falling! The branch 
has broken and you're going down. It all happens so fast that you don't 
even have time to scream. 
Several branches break your fall, but you still crash hard to the 
ground. You lie there a moment to catch your breath. Your leg is throbbing 
with pain. You try to stand, but it won't bear any weight. You're sure it's 
broken. You won't last long out here with a broken leg. 
To work on finding shelter, press here. 
To build a signal fire instead, press here. 

The air already has a chill to it, and you're not about to get into the 
river naked. You tighten the straps on your backpack and carefully step 
into the water and start across. The water is so cold it takes your breath 
away. The water is also deeper than you expected듩early up to your chest. 
At one point your toe catches a sharp rock and you stumble. Now 
everything is soaked듳ou, your clothing, your backpack, and everything in 
it. 
By the time you reach the other side, you're shivering. You need a fire 
to warm up. You gather wood, shaking your arms and legs as you move. 
But when you go into your pack, you find that your matches won't light. Of 
course wet matches are useless. Meanwhile, your teeth are chattering. 
Your body is losing heat quickly. You realize that you're in terrible danger. 
You can't make a fire, your clothes are soaked and the air is growing 
colder by the minute. 
You fall to the ground and curl up into a ball. You're so cold. Your 
breathing is becoming shallow, and your thoughts become clouded. At 
times you're confused about where you are and what you're doing. You 
think you're home in bed and wonder why it's so cold. At other times, you 
know exactly where you are, but it doesn't even seem to matter anymore. 
In another time and place, you'd know that all of these are signs of 
advanced hypothermia. But now all you know is that you're desperately 
cold. Sometime before morning, you take your last breath. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

back back back

Steep cliffs can be difficult for even experienced climbers. 
You consider yourself an excellent climber, and you think you can 
handle this cliff. But with no rope, you know that one slip will leave you 
dead. You have to be careful. 
Off to one side of the river, the cliff is mostly dry. You can see exposed 
tree roots sticking out of it. They'll make excellent handholds and 
footholds. You take a deep breath and start your way down. The sound of 
the crashing water below is deafening, but you block it out and focus. 
About half way down, a tree root snaps off in your hand. For a 
moment you're falling, but you somehow manage to catch yourself on 
another root. Your heart is racing, but you don't panic. You slowly make 
your way down, and finally your feet are on solid ground. 
As you turn around to continue walking, your jaw drops. Two people 
are walking toward you. 
"Hello!" they shout. "Are you  
They're two sisters, Julia and Abby. They've hiked to this waterfall, 
but their car is parked only a few miles away. 
"I'm so glad you spotted me," you say, suddenly feeling exhausted. "I 
don't know how much longer I could have survived out here." 
Abby grabs you by the hand. "Come on," she says. "We've got food and 
water back at the car. Let's get you something to eat."
You close your eyes and take a deep breath. You're going to be. 

THE END 
To follow another path, press here. back
To read the conclusion, press here. 

You know that in a survival situation, climbing is incredibly 
dangerous. A fall could kill you. Even a sprained ankle could be the end of 
you. You'll walk parallel to the cliff and see if there's a better way down. 
After several hours of hiking, you're tired and hungry. The cliff still 
blocks your way, and it's higher than ever. You haven't had water in hours, 
and you feel dehydration starting to set in. Your skin is flushed and your 
mouth feels as if it's full of cotton. 
You force yourself to keep walking. By evening you feel awful. You are 
severely dehydrated. You curl up and try to get a few hours of sleep, 
hoping that will help. But by morning, you're completely drained. You're 
cold and shivering. You try to stand but the lack of water leaves you 
lightheaded. You faint, bashing your head against a rock. 
You're dimly aware that you're bleeding듧osing more precious 
moisture. But at this point, you no longer really care. The wilderness of the 
Blue Mountains has beaten you. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. back

The berries and leaves of the pokeweed plant are toxic to people. 

You're hungry and you'll need your strength, so you decide that it's 
time to take a chance. You pop a handful of the berries into your mouth. 
The berries are bitter and rough, with hard seeds that you have to spit out. 
But you figure that at least they'll give you some energy. You pick a few 
more bunches and force them down. 

Your meal doesn't seem to do a lot for your hunger, but it's time to get 
moving again. So you head east looking for a stream or river to follow, or 
a road that will lead to people. 
After a few hours of hard hiking, you're not feeling well. You have 
terrible diarrhea. You're stopping every few minutes. Your stomach is 
doing flips, and you feel as if you might have a fever. You sit down for a 
moment to catch your breath, but when you stand back up, you black out 
and fall back down. 
After a few moments, you get slowly to your feet and continue 
moving. You need water. The diarrhea is quickly putting you into a state of 
severe dehydration. You find a small stream and drink some of the water 
not bothering to purify it first by boiling it. But as soon as you swallow it, 
your stomach churns and you vomit it all back up again. 
You flop down by the edge of the stream. You're exhausted. The 
berries you ate must have been poisonous. If you don't get medical help 
soon, you're going to die out here. But as you close your eyes to doze off 
you know that help isn't coming. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. back

Your first priority is finding shelter. Since you can't stand, your 
options are limited. A large fallen log lies a few hundred feet away. You 
drag yourself over to it. 
There's a small hollow under part of the log. You climb down into the 
hollow. There, you'll be sheltered from the wind and at least somewhat 
from the rain. 
Pain shoots through your leg any time you move it. So you lie still and 
close your eyes. All you can do is hope someone comes along. 
Night comes, then morning. Your throat and mouth are bone dry. 
Your stomach is growling. You need food and water, but when you try to 
move, you almost black out from the pain. So you just lie there. 
By afternoon you're burning up with a fever. Your thoughts are 
clouded. But you know one thing. Help isn't coming. You realize sadly that 
this hollow isn't just your shelter. It will also be your grave. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. back
To read the conclusion, press here. 

You're desperate. You've got to get someone's attention fast. With no 
way to get either food or water, your life is now measured in days or even 
hours. Building a signal fire is your only hope. 
It's difficult to do without the use of your leg. You manage to find a 
sturdy stick that you can use as a crutch. Slowly you gather materials for a 
fire. It's hard work, and you're sweating heavily. But soon you have a blaze 
going. 
Next you need damp wood and leaves. These will create big plumes of 
smoke. You even urinate on a small pile of wood to make it wetter. Then 
you stack the wet wood and leaves. Slowly the smoke begins to rise. Clouds 
of it rise above the treetops. 
For the next several hours, you feed the fire. The pain in your leg is 
intense, but you do your best to ignore it. Your life is on the line here. 

Australian park rangers sometimes patrol with dogs. 

Suddenly you hear a cracking sound. Someone듪r something들s 
coming your way. "Hello!" you shout. You're almost shocked to hear 
someone shout back! 
A young woman in a uniform is headed your way. "Hello, I'm Mia," 
she says. "I'm a park ranger. I saw the smoke. Are you " 
"No, I'm lost and I think my leg is broken!" you answer. Mia has a 
radio, which she uses to call for help. "Don't worry," she tells you. "We'll 
get you out of here. 
You know that with a broken leg, you won't be biking any time soon, 
but you don't care right now. As bad as things looked, you managed to 
survive. It'll make a great story to tell your family and friends. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

CHAPTER 4 
Lost in the Cascades 
You look out from your small camp, scanning the horizon. 
Everywhere you look you see trees and snow-capped mountains. In 
another time and place, you'd find the scene beautiful. But now it fills you 
with dread. There's no sign of civilization, and your situation is growing 
critical. 
What started as a hiking trip with your older brother, Brandon, has 
gone terribly wrong. The two of you had planned a long weekend of hiking 
in Washington's Cascade Mountains. But yesterday you realized that you 
were lost. And now things are even worse듁randon fell while climbing a 
rock face, badly breaking his leg. He's in terrible pain, and you don't know 
what to do. Your cell phones are dead, your food is almost gone, and 
Brandon is in shock. 

The Cascade range stretches from northern California into 
Canada. 

You're not sure how long you can survive out here. Brandon is in 
desperate need of medical help. His broken leg bone juts out of his skin, 
and he's at risk of infection. Without help, he could die out here. The 
thought of losing your brother has you choking up already. 
But this is no time for tears. Brandon's life드nd your own듟epend 
on you. You've got to get him the help he needs. 
To stay with Brandon and wait for rescue, press here. 
To strike out into the wilderness in search of rescue, press here. back

Brandon is in bad shape. You don't think it's a good idea to leave him 
by himself. When you don't come home tomorrow, your family will start to 
worry. A rescue effort should be under way within a day or two. All you 
have to do is keep the two of you alive until then. 
You build a warm fire and cover Brandon with all of the blankets 
you've got. You get water from a nearby stream and boil it so it's safe to 
drink. Then you set out to find something to eat. You're already hungry, 
and Brandon will need nourishment to help fight his injuries. 
You spend about an hour foraging for food. As you kneel down to 
gather juicy Saskatoon berries, you notice movement nearby. There's a 
face staring out at you from the brush! 
Your heart races as you realize that you're looking at a cougar! And 
you're crouched down the cat probably thinks you are prey. You've got to 
act fast! 
To stand up and confront the cougar, press here. 
To curl up in a ball and play dead, press here. back

Brandon may not have more than a day or two to live. You can't afford 
to sit around waiting. It's time to take action. You've already got a small 
lean-to shelter built for him. You build him a small fire and leave him 
wood that he can easily reach and add to it. You fill his canteen with the 
last of your fresh water and give him the last of your food듮wo granola 
bars. Then you give him a hug. 
"I'll be back with help," you promise. 
"I won't go anywhere," Brandon jokes. He gives you a smile, although 
you know it's all for show. 
With one last look back, you head out into the wilderness. This area is 
part of the North Cascades National Park, so you hope to find a park 
ranger or even other campers out here. 
You figure that the more ground you can cover, the better your 
chances of finding someone. So all you have along is warm clothing, a 
nearly empty canteen, and a lighter. By traveling light you'll be able to 
move faster. 
The terrain is uneven and the brush is thick. Branches smack you in 
the face, and mosquitoes constantly pester you. But you push on. Brandon 
is depending on you. Finally you have to stop듮he sun is setting. You find 
a large fallen log and get to work building a lean-to shelter. You lean a 
dozen large branches against the log and cover them with smaller 
branches and leaves. It's a quick and easy shelter, but it will protect you 
from wind and rain. 

You get water from a small, fast-moving stream. The stream is 
probably from melted snow, which means drinking the water would be 
safe. But you don't want to take any chances. You build a small fire and 
boil the water inside the canteen. 

A sturdy tree trunk and branches form a simple lean-to shelter. 

With your fire to keep you warm, you lay down on the hard ground for 
an uncomfortable night. In the morning your stomach wakes you up. You 
feel as if you're starving. Can you spend another day of hard hiking 
without food? 
To stop to look for food, press here. 
To continue searching for help, press here. back

Thimbleberries are similar to raspberries, but are larger.

You need something in your stomach if you're going to hike all day. 
You want to find beaked hazel shrubs that produce hazelnuts. These nuts 
are loaded with protein and fat. 
You search for about an hour before you find a shrub with small 
green hazelnut husks. The nuts won't be ripe for about another month. 
You sigh, realizing that you've wasted valuable time. Then you see 
thimbleberries. You grab a handful. They are pretty tart, but at least they 
fill your stomach. 

It's back to your hike. Early in the afternoon, you see a thin wisp of 
smoke rising in the distance. It could be a sign of people, so you head for 
it. 
Soon you come to a deep, narrow gorge carved out by a small river. 
You have to get to the other side, but it's far too steep to climb. A tall, 
narrow tree has fallen over the gorge, bridging the gap. But you have no 
idea how strong the wood is, and it's covered with slick moss. Crossing it 
would be a huge risk. But it might take hours to find another way across. 
To find a safer place to cross, press here. 
To cross on the fallen tree, press here. back

You're not about to stop to look for food. Your brother is back at camp 
fighting for his life and every second is precious. So you press on, ignoring 
your growling stomach. 
About an hour later, you come upon a river. You know that one of the 
best ways to find people is to follow a river downstream. But walking along 
the uneven riverbank will be difficult. 
The forest floor is littered with fallen logs. One large log sits right 
alongside the riverbank. You could use it as a float, and make quick time 
down the river. But you know that a log isn't a very reliable flotation 
device, and rivers in the Cascades can be rough. The water will be bitterly 
cold, which could put you in danger of hypothermia. back
To continue by foot, press here. 
To use the log as a float, press here. 

There's no way you'll trust that dead tree with your life. You've got to 
find another way. You work your way alongside the gorge until the slope 
becomes less steep. Finally you scramble down one side, cross the shallow 
river, and climb back up the other side. You're back on your way, though 
you've lost several hours in the process. 
Late in the afternoon, you finally find what you've been looking for 
other people! A group of college kids are camping. You stumble into 
their camp, waving your arms. "Help! I need help!" you shout. 
For a moment the surprised campers just stare at you. You can't 
imagine how filthy and ragged you must look to them. But after a moment 
of shock, the kids spring into action. "Are you all right?" asks one girl as 
two others rush to your side. 
"I'm  but my brother is alone and hurt out there," you reply. "I 
need to get him help." 
"I've got a cell phone," says a boy. "I'll call for help. You just sit down 
and get something to eat." 
Within an hour you hear the thumping blades of a helicopter in the 
distance. You watch anxiously as the chopper touches down to pick you 
up. Now you just need to get to Brandon. 
Press here. back

Going into the river would be a huge risk. You're not sure the added 
speed would be worth it. So you continue along the riverbank by foot. 
You spend the entire afternoon moving along the banks. Then 
suddenly you hear voices! Excited, you pick up the pace and round a bend. 
There you see a beautiful sight드 man and a woman fly fishing in the 
river! You shout and wave at them. they look puzzled at first, but quickly 
come to help. 
"My brother is hurt. He needs help fast!" you tell them. 
The couple's names are Erika and Jesse. They use their cell phone to 
report the emergency. Then they give you much-needed food and water. 
Soon a helicopter arrives. There's no time to waste! 
Press here. back

Humans aren't normal prey for a cougar, so you need to make sure 
the big cat knows what you are. You stand up, grab a stick, and start 
shouting. The cougar pauses, looking unsure of what to do. 
"Get!" you shout, swinging the stick toward the cougar. "Go away!" 
To your great relief, the cougar does just that. The cat must have 
decided that you're more trouble than you're worth. 
You start back to camp with your berries. Looks like that's all you'll 
have to eat. Just then, you see movement again. You gasp, hoping the 
cougar hasn't returned. Then you hear rustling noise and spy a ruffed 
grouse. Normally you wouldn't have much of a chance to catch it, but this 
bird has an injured leg and can't move very fast. You act quickly, grabbing 
a large stick. 

The ruffed grouse's coloring blends well with the forest. 

You charge at the grouse, clubbing it unconscious with your stick. You 
grab it, and in one smooth motion, snap its neck. It's not a huge bird, but it 
will provide lots of much-needed protein. 
You hurry back to camp to clean the bird. You pluck the feathers and 
use your knife to remove the guts. Soon the mouth-watering smell of 
roasting grouse fills the air. The smell even pulls Brandon out of his 
feverish sleep for a few minutes. 
"Everything " he asks hoarsely. 
"Don't worry," you tell him. "I've got everything under control. Just 
hold on. Help will be here soon. " You hand him a piece of meat. 
Brandon eats a little, but not as much as you'd like. He's feverish, and 
he doesn't always seem to fully understand where he is. But at least he's 
got something in his stomach now. It's energy you both needed badly. 
Once he's sleeping soundly, you curl up next to him. Your body heat 
will help keep you both warm through the night. 
The next day is rainy and seems to drag on. You build a simple shelter 
of large branches and brush to make sure Brandon stays warm. You collect 
more berries and even try fishing in a nearby stream, though without any 
success. 
Brandon's fever is getting worse, and you're getting very worried. That 
night you go to bed hungry. You don't know whether Brandon will live to 
see another night. Rescue has to come tomorrow, or you're going to lose him
At dawn it's decision time. Can you afford to wait any longer? If 
there's a rescue effort, it should be out in full force. You have to do 
something to get help today. 
To head out in search of rescuers. press here. back back
To build a large signal fire, press here. 

You don't think you can wait any longer. You head out determined to 
find help. As you hike you hear the sound of a helicopter in the distance. 
But you can't signal it. 
Late in the afternoon, the helicopter flies almost over your head. You 
rush to a small clearing, snap off a long leafy branch, and wave it 
frantically. The pilot spots you and brings the chopper down in the 
clearing. You quickly hop in the passenger seat. 
Press here. 

You don't want to waste any more time. Crossing over this fallen tree 
is a risk but you've got to take risks if you're going to save Brandon. 
Carefully you slide out onto the log. You lay flat, wrapping your arms 
and legs around it. This allows you to distribute your weight along a larger 
surface of the log. It's less likely to break that way. 
At first everything goes smoothly. But about halfway across, you feel 
the log beginning to shift. You pick up your pace, but soon you hear a 
sickening snap ahead of you. A moment later, you're falling. The tree 
wasn't able to support your weight, and it broke off on the far side of the 
gorge! 
You only fall about 20 feet but that's more than enough. The river is 
only a foot or so deep, and sharp rocks lurk under its surface. 
Everything happens so fast that you don't even feel your head 
smashing into one of the rocks. You've failed to get out of the wilderness 
alive, and your brother will pay the price along with you. 

Make sure a tree is sturdy before using it to cross water. 
THE END back
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

Large rocks are dangerous obstacles in rivers and streams. 
You know it's a terrible risk but Brandon maybe running out of time. 
You roll the log into the water and hang on. The water is so cold that it 
takes your breath away. But soon you're floating down the river at a fast 
speed. Too fast. You quickly realize that this was a mistake. The river is 
filled with large rocks, and the strong current makes it almost impossible 
to steer around them. 
Just then the river narrows as it flows through a gorge. You're headed 
right into a huge boulder. You desperately try to shift your course, but it's 
no use. You slam right into the jagged edge of the rock. Pain shoots 
through your right leg. It feels as if the impact crushed it. You can see 
blood flowing into the water. 
After a few minutes, you start feeling lightheaded from the blood loss 
and the pain. You try to cling to the log, but you're too weak. You slip into 
the water as you lose consciousness. You drown there in the river, never to 
know what became of your brother. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 
back 
Cougars can leap 45 feet horizontally. 

You curl into a tight ball and hit the ground, hoping the big cat will 
ignore you. But it's the wrong choice. Cougars are opportunistic predators. 
They usually prefer to attack easy, small targets. By curling up into a ball, 
you're showing the cougar that you're no threat to it. 
The big cat pounces. You try to scramble to your feet and run, but it's 
too late. You feel sharp claws tearing your skin. It's powerful jaw closes 
around your throat. It's a horrible and terrifying way to die. But the 
saddest part is that now there's no one to help Brandon. He will surely die 
too. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. back

A signal fire is your best chance. You find a clearing and get to work. 
You start with small branches and dry leaves. You slowly add larger 
pieces of wood until you've got a blazing bonfire. Next you add wet wood 
and leaves to the blaze. These materials release huge plumes of smoke as 
they burn. You continue to feed the signal fire all morning. 
Your work pays off. When you hear the sound of helicopter blades, 
you stand up and wave your arms. You've been spotted! 
The chopper lands, and you lead rescue workers back to camp. They 
place Brandon on a stretcher and load him into the helicopter. Brandon is 
in a great deal of pain, but still conscious. He squeezes your hand. 
"We'll get your brother the help he needs," one of the rescuers tells 
you. "He should pull through." 
You've done it! Both of you are going to make it out of the wilderness 
alive. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

To find a safer place to cross 
To continue by foot 
To head out in search of rescuers 
back
back
back

You thought you knew exactly where your camp was, but everything 
below looks the same. The helicopter circles the area for half an hour. "Are 
you sure this is where you were?" the pilot asks you. 
"I thought so, but maybe not," you tell him. You're close to tears by 
now. 
 let's go about 10 miles north," he replies. Almost another half- 
hour passes before you see a flash of color below. It's your camp! 
The helicopter lands, and two emergency medical technicians rush 
out to tend to your brother. You watch anxiously as they lift him onto a 
stretcher and load him onto the helicopter. 
Brandon is moaning in pain and delirious from fever. He doesn't even 
seem to realize that you're by his side. 
You look at the Their faces are worried. "Is he going to make 
it?" you ask. 
"We'll get him to a hospital as fast as we can, but don't get your hopes 
up too high," one replies. "He's in an advanced stage of infection."
You close your eyes as you reach for Brandon's hand. After all your 
work to save him, you only hope that it was enough. 
THE END 
To follow another path, press here. 
To read the conclusion, press here. 

CHAPTER 5 
Surviving the 
Wilderness 
It's no accident that the first part of the word wilderness is wild. Far 
from civilization, nature can be wild and unpredictable. Danger lurks 
around every turn. Big predators such as bears and cougars are only the 
start. From snakes to poisonous berries, tainted water, and bitterly cold 
temperatures, nature has a nearly endless number of ways to hurt or even 
kill you. 

The wilderness is a beautiful place, but it can be dangerous. 

To make it out alive, you'll need to keep your wits about you. While it 
helps to have a strong, healthy body, the first and most important tool you 
have for survival is your mind. You'll need to use it to make the best 
possible decisions, and you'll need to stay under control at all times. 

A survival situation will test the limits of what you think you can 
do. 

Avoid panic. Stay positive. Always work toward the final goal staying 
alive. Never, ever give up. The people who make it through survival 
situations are the ones who keep fighting and keep going no matter how 
bad things seem. 
If you should ever find yourself lost in the wilderness, your first step is 
to assess the situation. Are you hurt? Are you in any immediate danger? Is 
there reason to believe rescuers will be looking for you? If so, will they 
know where to look? 
Once you've answered these questions, it's time to form a plan. Is your 
goal to stay alive and signal rescuers, or do you need to move out and find 
help yourself? Do you have the water and food you need to survive, and if 
not, how can you get it? Finding the right answers to these questions can 
be the difference between life and death. 

Eating bugs may seem gross, but many are good sources of 
protein. 

People often have to do very difficult things to stay alive. Could you 
eat bugs for food? Could you wave and shout at a huge cougar, knowing 
that it was your best chance to survive? Could you keep pushing yourself 
to live, even when everything starts to feel hopeless? 
If you can answer yes to these questions, you might have what it takes 
to survive a desperate situation. You might need some luck along the way, 
but surviving is in your mind. If you can do what needs to be done, you'll 
have a great chance of getting out alive. 

REAL SURVIVORS 

Ken Hildebrand 
In 2008 Ken Hildebrand was driving an all-terrain vehicle  checking 
animal traps in Canada's Rocky Mountains when disaster struck. The 
vehicle flipped, pinning Hildebrand's leg. He spent a night trying to free 
himself, but couldn't. He survived by eating the rotting meat from the 
animals he had collected. He covered himself with the animal skins to stay 
warm in the cold temperatures. He collected dew and ate damp dirt for 
water. He even chased away coyotes by blowing on an emergency whistle. 
He survived 96 hours before he was rescued. 

Grayson Wynne 
Nine-year-old Grayson Wynne didn't panic when he got lost in 2009 after 
wandering away from his family's camping place in Utah's Ashley National 
Forest. Grayson had seen survival programs on TV and knew what to do. 
He took shelter under a fallen tree. He tore his yellow jacket into pieces 
and tied them to trees for rescuers to see. The next day he found a creek 
and followed it. When Grayson heard a rescue helicopter, he took one of 
the pieces of his jacket and waved it in the air. The rescuers spotted him 
and brought him to safety. 

Kelly Guzman 
In 2010 Kelly Guzman had planned a day trip into the Rocky Mountains of 
Colorado. But the trip soon turned disastrous. Her van became stuck in a 
remote creek, and nobody knew where she was. Guzman stayed with the 
van for three days. Finally she decided to try to hike to rescue. She 
attached a shiny foil emergency blanket to the van as a signal. She also left 
an arrow made of sticks to show the direction she was going. She then 
walked into the forest, following a rarely used logging road. About a week 
later, her van was spotted and rescuers tracked her down. 

Rita and Albert Chretien 
In 2011 Rita and Albert Chretien were driving from Canada to Las Vegas, 
Nevada when they left the main road to do some sightseeing. Their van 
got stuck in mud near the Idaho-Nevada border. Albert headed out on foot 
to find rescue, but Rita stayed with the van. She carefully rationed what 
little food the couple had brought. She melted snow to use as drinking 
water. With both shelter and water, Rita managed to survive 49 days in the 
wilderness until hunters found her. But Albert wasn't so lucky. He was 
never seen again. 


survival quiz
if you encounter a grizzly bear in the wild what's the best way to avoid an 
attack run away as fast as you can speak loudly but calmly as you
slowly back away from the bear
curl into a ball
throw food at the bear
which of the following insects are edible
grasshoppers grubs ants all of the above
if you're lost in the wild what is one of the best ways to find civilization
walk straight north
walk straight south
follow a river downstream
follow a river upstream













































































































































































































































































































































































































