
Chirping crickets 

It's late in the summer the day is nearly over the sun hangs low in the sky 
listen the crickets are loudly chirping. 

You can hear crickets chirping almost everywhere in parks and woods in fields and on lawns 
along country roads even inside your house. 

It is the male crickets you hear they usually stay in one spot and call the females to them 
most of the females cannot make sounds. 

A male cricket does not chirp with his voice he makes a chirping sound with his front wings. 
Each wish has a sharp edge called the scraper. 
The wing also has a long bumpy vein called a file. 

the cricket lifts up his front wings and rubs the scraper of one wing against the file of the 
other wing. Chirp back and forth his two front wings chirp chirp chirp. would you like to 
chirp like a male cricket get a piece of stiff paper and a nail file rub the file against
the edge of the paper the sound is almost the same as a cricket's chirp
file scraper



The ears of a cricket are not where you'd expect them to be. 
They are under the knees of the front legs. 
Each ear is a tiny hole with a tight tissue thin cover. 
Crickets hear chirping sounds through these tiny holes. ear

This is what happens. The chirps makes the air move or vibrate. 
The vibrating air forms sound waves.
 The sound waves spread out to all sides. When they bump into the cricket's ears 
the cricket hears the sound. 

A female cricket hears the male chirps. 
She jumps toward the sound. Closer and closer she gets. Soon she is alongside the chirping 
male cricket and they mate. Inside the female tiny eggs start to grow. 
When the eggs are ready she uses a long pointed tube at her back end to make tiny holes in the 
ground then she lays her eggs inside the holes. The eggs look like tiny yellow bananas. 

In the spring the eggs hatch into nymphs. A nymph is lighter in color than an adult cricket. 
It doesn't have any wings. 

Soon the nymph gets too big for its hard outer covering. 
It wriggles out of its old skin and grows a new outside cover. 
This is called molting. 
The nymphs molt again and again. 
Some nymphs molt as many as twelve times depending on the amount of food available and the 
weather conditions. After the last molt they are adult crickets. 

Most adult crickets have two pairs of wings front wings and back wings. 
Usually the wings lie flat over each other. The back wings are bigger than the front ones. 
Some crickets use these for flying. the front wings in males are used to chirp. 
Like all insects crickets three pairs of legs the two front pairs are small but the back legs 
are big and strong. The crickets use them when it jumps or flies away. 
Some crickets can leap as far as two feet. That is about as far as you can hop. 

back wings front wings

Crickets have two big eyes. Each eye is made up of many tiny eyes. 
They let the cricket see in many different directions at the same time but cricket vision 
still is not very good.  In fact crickets rely more on their ears to protect them from danger. 
Few enemies can sneak up on a cricket. You know that if you've every tried to catch one. 

The cricket's mouth is at the front of its head. It has no teeth. But its strong jaws are 
able to cut up the leaves and small insects it eats. 

Two long thin feelers on its head also help the cricket. 
These feelers are called antennae. Some antennae are longer than the cricket's whole body. 
Antennae help crickets find food and alert them to danger. 

Thousands of different kinds of crickets live around the world. 
Field crickets are the most common. They are about one inch long and are dark brown or black 
in color. 
field crickets mostly live in tiny tunnels in the ground
male field crickets sit in their tunnel entrances all day and chirp loudly at night
at the same time they are watching out for danger if an enemy shows up the male field 
cricket gives a high piping chirp into the tunnel he pops


You can find ground crickets in the united states and Europe. 
They are brown or black like field crickets. But they are only about half the size. 
Ground crickets settle in damp places such as grassy riverbanks. 
Their song sounds like the tinkling of bells. 
Many ground crickets hide during the daylight hours. 
But at night they are active. Eating fighting and mating. 
Tree crickets are the same size as field crickets. But they are pale green or white in color. 
Their very long antennae reach back to the tips of their rear legs. 
Male tree crickets do not usually chirp alone. Instead they chirp in groups. 
A typical chorus of tree crickets may have hundreds of males. 
Their high pitched song sounds like. 
Tree crickets hide in trees bushes and tall grass. Here they find the smaller insects that 
they like to eat. House crickets are best known in Europe. They would rather live indoors 
especially in warm places. Their favorite spots are near a stove fireplace or heater. 
These light brown or yellow crickets endlessly repeat their high trilling sound. 
Many people believe that house crickets bring good luck. 
Having a cricket in your house they say means that nice things will happen to you. 
The sky is very dark now. The loud chirpings of the crickets fill the air. 
It is the nighttime sound of late summer. 

your pet cricket
it's fun to catch and study a pet cricket for a while find a big clear jar or clear plastic
container with a wide neck and a cover put an inch of dirt in the jar ask an adult 
to poke lots of small holes in the cover so that the cricket can breathe

take you jar outdoors late some afternoon near the end of summer walk around until you hear
the sound of a chirping cricket gently tap the cricket into the jar then screw on the cover
at home open the jar and drop in some food crickets will eat bits of lettuce or banana moist
bread a drop of honey or even dry dog or cat food. it's good to add an egg carton cup shelter
because crickets usually don't chirp unless they feel safe knowing they have somewhere to hide
watch your cricket jump around and eat the food listen for its chirps

enjoy your cricket for a day and then let it go put it back where you found it crickets
don't like to be in cages they need their freedom the same as you and I do

telling the temperature
did you know that tree crickets can tell us the temperature the warmer it is the faster 
they chirp in cooler weather their chirps slow down
try this the next time you hear a chirping cricket. get a watch with a second hand 
count the number of chirps the cricket makes in seconds how many chirps did you hear
add to this number let's say you heard 20 chirps the temperature is or degrees fahrenheit
