Clara Caterpillar 

One day a cream-colored butterfly laid an egg on a cabbage leaf. Grow up to be 
courageous and contented Clara, she called to her egg as the wind carried her 
away 

Clara lay curled in the egg case for a considerable time. Eventually a 
crowd of caterpillars clustered around her. She's incredibly late coming out 
commented one. She's very cautious agreed another. A curious caterpillar 
knocked on Clara's egg case. This is Cornelius he said. Come on out but I'm 
comfortable in here called Clara 

Who cares if she comes out scoffed a scowling 
caterpillar called Catisha. It's clear she'll only be a cabbage caterpillar. 
Cabbage caterpillars are so common. Don't be cruel Catisha Cornelius scolded. 
Cabbage caterpillars are cute. 

Did you say cabbage cried Clara. Cabbage sounds 
scrumptious. So Clara cut a hole in her egg case and clambered out. I'm a 
lucky caterpillar she said. Cornelius come and share this delectable cabbage.


Clara and Cornelius climbed and crawled and capered about. They had carefree 
caterpillar fun. They crammed themselves with cabbage, carrot, and cauliflower 
leaves. They grew into colossal caterpillars.

Then one day Cornelius called 
Clara come and make your chrysalis. Don't encourage her mocked Catisha. She's 
only going to become a common cabbage butterfly. Why is Catisha being catty 
Clara asked. Catisha is conceited comforted Cornelius. She knows she'll become 
an attractive crimson-colored butterfly.

Then Clara, Cornelius, and the other 
caterpillars caught on to the cabbage, carrot, and cauliflower plants with 
cottony threads. They crinkled and discarded their skins and cuddled down 
inside their chrysalises. 

I'm crushed in here.
I hate being cooped up.
I'm 
cramped 
I'm creased 
I'm crumpled 
I'm coiled like a corkscrew 
My back tickles

It's making me cranky
 I can't scratch
 I can't cope complained Catisha 

cried 
Cornelius to Clara. Are you comfortable. Actually I'm very cozy Clara called 
back

 Then one morning the chrysalises began to crack and out climbed delicate 
creatures. Cool cried Clara. You all look captivating Cornelius you're a 
terrific copper color. Why is that scruffy creature conversing with us 
complained a scowling crimson-colored butterfly. Catisha Clara said. 
You are spectacular 
Of course replied Catisha and you Clara are so cream. 
I think cream is cute declared Cornelius. Cute Catisha snickered. Don't be 
ridiculous Cornelius. 

Then Catisha climbed toward the clouds on her scaly 
cobweb wings. Suddenly a crow cawed and scared everyone. Snacktime he 
exclaimed as he caught sight of the crimson-colored Catisha. The butterflies 
panicked and frantically scattered in all directions 

You can't escape 
screeched the crow to Catisha. Catisha I'm coming to the rescue cried Clara. 
Clara be careful screamed Cornelius. Plucking up her courage Clara flicked her 
wings at the crow. Catch me if you can you scalawag she taunted. Then Clara 
curved down and ducked into a camellia bush. 

The crow became confused and 
forgot about Catisha. He cocked his head and pecked in the petals. But Clara 
the cream-colored butterfly lay camouflaged behind a curtain of cream-colored 
camellias. That's curious complained the crestfallen crow. I was confident I 
could capture a succulent snack.

 The coast is clear Cornelius shouted. The 
crisis is over. Congratulations Clara complimented the other butterflies. 
Clara you're so clever cried the shocked Catisha. I could never camouflage 
myself like you. I'm too colorful. I was crazy to scoff at your cream color. 
It's incredible and cute too declared Cornelius. 

Cornelius clapped his wings. 
Listen carefully he commanded. That crow is a scoundrel. Let's cling close to 
Clara. Clara can stop him from catching us. Clara is so capable and 
courageous. Clara is lucky to be cream colored said Catisha.

 And I'm a 
completely contented butterfly said Clara. 
