eagle song 
he lives in the city but that's not his home


she'kon

"Hey, Chief, going home to your teepee?"
Danny Bigtree clenched his fists but kept walking. The November wind was cold 
against his face. It blew his long black hair over his eyes. He thought again of 
cutting it short.
If he asked his mother to cut his hair, she might look at him in that way she had. 
She wouldn't tell him no, though. Even though her eyes might question his decision, 
he knew she would cut it if he asked. But he knew, too, that even with short hair 
he'd still be noticed. The other boys would still say things like that. That's how 
it always was here in Brooklyn. Especially if you were different.
It would do no good to say, as he had once said to them back in September, "I'm not 
a chief. We're Iroquois and we never lived in teepees. We lived in longhouses a 
long time ago, and now I live in an apartment building." They'd just laugh again. 
Then Tyrone and Brad would ask him where his war pony was.
None of the boys followed him. They went back to their basketball game. Danny 
stopped at the corner and

looked back to watch them play. He wasn't really interested in basketball, but the 
way they played it almost looked like fun. Some of them were really good, 
especially Tyrone. While Danny watched, Tyrone bounced the ball, cut around two of 
the other boys, jumped up and threw the ball in a high long arc. It swished down 
through the basket.
Brad, Tyrone's best friend, came over and the two boys slapped their palms together 
in a high five. Danny sighed.
He'd never played much basketball on the reservation.
Lacrosse was his game. But nobody here played lacrosse.

Danny found himself thinking again of what it had been like up at Akwesasne. 
The wide St. Lawrence River.

He knew it was so polluted from the factories on the Canadian side that no one 
could fish in it anymore, but in his memory it was beautiful. Akwesasne. Fields and 
woods to play in. Lots of other Indian kids who looked and talked the way he did. 
Akwesasne. The name was so much better than "Brooklyn." Akwesasne meant "The Place 
Where the Partridge Drums." He didn't know what Brooklyn meant.
There had been plenty of reasons to leave Akwesasne, though. No jobs was one. It 
was because of the lack of employment that men like his dad traveled all over the 
country to do ironwork. When his mom had finished her social work degree and been 
offered the job at the American Indian Community House in Manhattan, she hadn't 
hesitated. It would be a better life, she'd promised. So far, for Danny, it hadn't 
been.
He went down into the subway entrance, and when he was on the train, he closed his 
eyes. That way he would not know if anyone was looking at him. If he kept his eyes 
closed long enough, he could imagine himself riding on the back of an eagle that 
would take him away from Brooklyn. It would take him away from schools and tenements
and people who made fun of him because he wasn't the same as them. It would take 
him to a place where there were other people like him and his parents, a faraway 
place. If he closed his eyes long enough, the roar of the rumbling wheels would 
become the sound of the waters of the St. Lawrence River going over the stones, the 
squeaking of the metal of the car would become the songs of birds.
But he couldn't keep his eyes closed too long. If he fell asleep, he might go right 
by his stop again the way he did last week. Then he wouldn't be able to get home 
before his mother. She would go to Mrs. Fisher's apartment to pick him up, and he 
wouldn't be there. His mother wouldn't say anything to him if he came home late, 
but he'd be able to tell from the look in her eyes that she had
been worried.
She already worried enough about Dad and the dangerous work he did every day, 
fifty stories or more above the earth. Danny didn't want to add to her worries. So 
he let the sounds of the birds and the clear river flow away from him. Two stops 
before his station he opened his eyes, and when the familiar letters that spelled 
out the name of their
neighborhood came into view, he stood up in front of the door and got out onto the 
platform.
When he came out of the subway station, he kept his eyes down on the sidewalk, not 
looking up at the windows. He could imagine people looking at him from those 
windows, pointing and laughing.
Danny reached his building. He put his hand down the neck of his sweatshirt and 
found the beaded string on which the door key hung. At the top of the stairs, he 
put up his fist to knock at Mrs. Fisher's door.
Their neighbor, a retired lady, gave Danny a snack and kept an eye on him till his 
mom came home. Salli Bigtree worked until five every day at the American Indian 

community House. It sometimes took her an hour to get home

from there by subway. Danny usually did his homework

and then watched TV with Mrs. Fisher while he waited

But down the hall the door to his own apartment swung open. He saw two things that 
brought a smile to his face. The first was his mother home from work much earlier 
than usual. She had opened the door for him and a
very big smile was on her face. The second thing Danny saw as he hurried through, 
the doorway was the hard hat placed on the table just inside the door. Painted on 
the steelworker's cap was a wide-winged eagle sitting on top of a big pine tree.
"Dad is home!" Danny said.
"In the shower," his mother said. "His crew got done on that building in Boston 
early. He came to the Community House to surprise me. Rosemary told me to take the 
rest of the day off. I was all through writing my proposal anyway." Danny's mother 
cocked her head as she looked at him. "You are grinning like a raccoon," she said.
"So are you," said Danny.
"So am I," said his mother. Then she leaned over and hugged him so hard that his 
feet came off the ground.
Danny hugged her too, and let her lift him up. His mother was very strong. She was 
almost six feet tall, taller than his father. He thought about how his father 
always teased his mother about her strength, teased her in a way that made her feel 
good, even though she would pretend
to ignore him.


Careful there,you are going to break his ribs.  boomed a voice as deep and 
familiar as the beat of a drum.
richard bigtree came out of the bathroom, still drying his own long hair.
that hair was as crow black as Danny's except for the places it was flecked with 
white on his temples. Danny's father was bare chested and built like a bear.
His body was as strong and as round as the trunk of a big pine tree.
Danny's mother dropped him, and Danny ran over to hug his father
she'kon his dad said, speaking the Mohawk word of greeting, the word for peace.
she'kon Danny answered, a little catch in his voice as he said it.
"You know why Iroquois men always listen to the women, Son?" his dad said, his arm 
around Danny.
"No, Dad, why?" Danny said, going along with the joke.
"It isn't just that they are usually wiser than the men," his dad said. Then he 
paused again. Danny's turn.
"It isn't, Dad?"

"And it isn't just that the women own the households and choose the chiefs."
"It isn't, Dad?"
"No. You know what it is, Dancing Eagle, my son?" Danny almost laughed then. 
Whenever his dad talked that way, his face deadpan, his voice imitating a Hollywood 
Indian, it was time for the punch line. Danny knew what to say next.
"No, my father, what is it?"
"We Iroquois men always listen to the women because if we don't, they will beat us 
up! Look out, here comes one now!"

Danny's mother grabbed his dad, pushed him back onto the floor, and began to tickle 
him.
"Help me, my son," his dad cried in a high, funny voice.
Danny jumped in to help. Somehow it ended up with both his mother and his father 
tickling him. Then, when he had laughed so much it started to hurt, the three of 
them just stayed there on the floor, their arms around each other.

It's so much fun when Dad is here, Danny thought.
Mom doesn't seem so tired when she comes home after work. Why can't it be like this 
all the time?
But he knew his father's job would take him away again, for weeks and weeks. He 
knew, too, that he would be back in school tomorrow. Back in that school where no 
one else was like him, where he had no friends and no one noticed him except to 
make fun of him.


Gustoweh
As he did his homework on the small dining room table, Danny listened to his mother 
and father talking in the kitchen.
"You'll only be home for the week?" his mother's voice said.
"Crew's going to Pittsburgh," his father's voice answered. "It's the Mohawk warrior 
tradition, Sal. You know, we men go out hunting while the women stay home and take 
care of the really important things." "I don't feel like being teased tonight, 
Rick." His mother's voice had become serious. Danny realized
how much noise his pencil was making as he scratched it across the paper. He 
stopped writing and listened harder.
But now he could no longer understand what his parents were saying. They were 
talking in Indian. He had never learned enough Mohawk to understand more than a 
word or two when people who were really fluent in the language were talking it 
fast. Even back in the Akwesasne Mohawk School where he used to go, people mostly 
talked English, except in the Native Culture class. His parents had always intended 
to send him to a school where Mohawk was spoken a lot of the time--like the Freedom 
School up on the rez. But then they'd moved to Brooklyn.
As Danny listened closely, though, he heard words that he understood. One of them 
was his name. His mother said it first and then his father said it, as if he was 
catching on to something. They didn't say much more in Mohawk, only a few 
sentences. Then there was a silence.
"Danny," his mother called to him, "clear off the table now so we can set it for 
dinner."
As the three of them sat together at the dining room table, Danny noticed again how 
broad his father was.
Richard Bigtree looked as solid as a building.

"Will I ever be as big as you, Dad?" he said.
"I'm Wolf Clan," Richard Bigtree said. "We tend to be big people. But you might be 
bigger. Your mother is Bear Clan and so that's what you are."
"Why don't I belong to your clan?" Danny said. He knew the answer, but he wanted 
his father to keep talking.
It made him feel good to hear his father's voice. Their apartment seemed so empty 
without it.
"Clan membership always comes from the mother.
That is the way it always is among our Iroquois people. It goes back a long time 
that way. The women are the ones who hold our nations together. We have to remember 
that." Richard Bigtree looked across the room at his wife.
"And if we don't remember it, the women make sure to remind us of it!" Danny's 
mother made a fist and shook it at her husband as he pretended to be afraid. Danny 
laughed.
When the dinner was over, Danny and his father went into the kitchen to do the 
dishes. Danny's mother had to go out to a meeting at the American Indian Community 
House.
"Try not to wreck the place while I'm gone," she called

from the door, and both Danny and his father rattled the pans as loudly as they 
could in response.


When they were done, they went into the living room.
Danny's father sat in the big chair and picked up the remote control. "What'll it 
be?" he said. "News or outer space?" He looked down at Danny.
"Dad," Danny said, "can I put on your hard hat?" Richard Bigtree put down the 
remote control. "Okay," he said. "But you be careful not to break it. That hard hat 
is real fragile!"
"You're teasing me, Dad. Didn't you tell me a steel beam could fall on your hard 
hat and it wouldn't even scratch it?"
"That's right, Son," Danny's father said. "Matter of fact, that's why I'm built 
like this. Used to be six foot five and skinny as a stick till a steel beam fell on 
my head while I was wearing that hard hat. Saved my life, but I got squooshed right 
down so I look like this now. Now I'm,

five foot nine." Danny's father patted his broad stomach.
"And I'm about five foot nine tall too."
Danny laughed. His father pointed with his chin toward the hall and Danny ran to 
get the hat. He put it on and
walked back into the room. He could barely see out from under it.
"In the old days our traditional caps, our gustowehs, had three hawk feathers on 
them, just like those I painted above the eagle on that hard hat you're wearing. 
That hard hat is what our gustowehs look like today, Son," his father said. "That 
is the cap of a real Iroquois man!" Danny reached up and took the cap off his head. 
He ran his palm over the beautiful design of the eagle that his father had painted 
on the front of the cap. The eagle's wings were spread open wide.
"That eagle there," his father said, "takes care of me. It won't let me fall when 
I'm up there on the iron." Danny sat again at his father's feet and put the cap 
down. "Dad," he said, "I think I need an eagle to take care of me."
His father said nothing. He waited for Danny to continue.
"It's the kids at school," Danny said. "They don't like me. They make fun of me and 
call me a chief and a redskin and they ask me where my headdress is and tell me to 
go home to my teepee. I want to kill them. Especially
Tyrone and Brad. They're really good at basketball, but they hate me. Nobody here 
plays lacrosse."
Danny paused, not sure what he wanted to say next.
"Do the other boys hit you or threaten you?" "No, at least not yet. But when 
they're not making fun of me, they just ignore me. Everybody does that, the boys 
and the girls too. Nobody sits with me at lunch, and in class they only talk to me 
because we have to talk in our work groups. Dad, I've been here over two months and 
I don't have one friend. It's like being in a war. And everybody else is on the 
other side. I don't belong here. I wish we could go back home."
"Your mother tells me," his father said, "that you sit in this chair when I am not 
here. I guess that is one of the things you and I have in common. Would you like to 
come over here?"
Danny put the hard hat back on his head and leaned against his father's chair.
"It is hard in fourth grade," his father said. "I remember back when I was in 
fourth grade. I had a teacher who would beat me. Does your teacher beat you?" Danny 
shook his head. For some reason he couldn't say
anything now, and his eyes were wet. He took the hard hat gustoweh off his head and 
rubbed his eyes with the knuckles of his hand. His father began to gently pat his 
back
"That's good that your teacher doesn't beat you. You know, when I met her at that 
open house in September, she asked me to come into your school some time and talk 
about our form of government, About the way we Iroquois did things. Some of the 
schools say now that our way of governing ourselves was a model for the American 
Constitution. So I was thinking about doing that this week, coming in to your 
class. But I wouldn't want to come to your class if your teacher is one who beats 
you." "No, Ms. Mobry is nice. She's awesome. It's the other boys. They might call 
you names, Dad."
"They might. They might listen too."
Danny's father was silent for a moment and then he took his hard hat and put it on 
his knee. He began to tap his fingers on the top of the hat in a two-beat rhythm 
that sounded to Danny like a waterdrum being played for a social dance. His father 
cleared his throat and then spoke again.

"Son," he said, "I know it is hard to live in a strange place, to be away from 
home. It's hard to be among people who don't know you. But you aren't the first 
person who's ever been lonely and without friends. Let me tell you a story, one of 
the great stories of our people. It might give you strength. It's about the man we 
call Aionwahta." "Hiawatha, Dad?"
"Yes, Hiawatha. Not the one in that poem by that man Longfellow, the one you said 
they had in one of the books in the library at school. This is the real story. 
You want to hear this story?"
"Henh!" Danny closed his eyes as he spoke that Mohawk word his mother had told him 
was to be said when one wanted to hear a story. When his father's voice spoke the 
old stories, he could imagine himself in a great bark lodge. He could smell the 
smoke from the fires, see the snow piled white and clean about the pine trees. The 
river flowed for him as his father spoke, and he felt at peace.


The Great Peace
This is the story that Danny's father told:

It was long ago. It was a time when our people had forgotten the original 
instructions of our Creator. Be good to each other, our Creator told us. Live 
together in peace. But we had forgotten.
Now our people fought with each other. The Mohawk and the Onondaga, the Cayuga and 
the Seneca and the Oneida were always at war. It was nation against nation, and 
within our nations it was village against village. And if one man was killed, then 
the other men of his village would seek revenge in a blood feud, taking a life for 
a life.


"The sun itself loves to see war," our people said. "That is why we have such 
power." And they continued to fight with each other.
Now, among our people there was one man who wanted peace. His name was Aionwahta. 
He was a Mohawk, but he left the Mohawk people when his sister died.
He mourned her death, but the Mohawk people were so used to war and death that they 
made fun of him in his grief. So he took his canoe and went to the west, toward the 
lands of the Onondaga.
"I will comfort others who are filled with sorrow," he said, "because no one will 
comfort me."
Aionwahta had a family, a wife and seven daughters. He worried about what things 
would be like for his children's children. So while he lived among the Onondagas, 
he spoke of peace. But the Onondagas were ruled by a man who was a sort of a 
monster. His name was Adodarhonh and his mind was full of evil thoughts. His 
thoughts were so twisted that he had snakes growing from his head. His body was 
twisted too, so that he was crooked seven places in his body, and he had killed 
many people with his 
wizardry. He was so evil that he could make birds fall dead out of the sky.

Aionwahta was a great speaker. When he spoke about ,

peace, the people of the warring Onondaga towns came to the council held in his 
house and listened to him. His

words were good.

"Now," the people said, "we must do something about Adodarhonh. We must pacify him, 
for he continues to kill people. We cannot have peace as long as his mind is not 
straight."

"This is true," Aionwahta said. "I shall go to Adodarhonh and tell him about 
peace."
Adodarhonh lived in a nest made of reeds in the swamp on the other side of the 
lake. "We shall do this," Aionwahta said: "We shall go by canoe across the lake." 
But as soon as the canoes were in the lake, the loud voice of Adodarhonh was heard 
across the waters. "A storm is coming to wash over you!" And as those words were 
spoken, a great wind came and the waves rose and the canoes were turned over. Many 
people drowned and the others swam back to the shore.
Once again the people tried to reach Adodarhonh to bring peace to him. 

"We shall walk around the lake to come to Adodarhonh's place," Aionwahta said. But 
as they walked around the lake, the loud voice spoke again, and the ground became 
marshy and the people could go no farther.
Each time they tried to reach the monster Adodarhonh, they failed. Then a terrible 
thing happened. One by one, Aionwahta's daughters died--by the evil magic of 
Adodarhonh.

Now Aionwahta was filled with grief. He did not know how to rid himself of his 
sorrow. He left the lands of the Onondaga and began to wander. First he went south, 
up Onondaga Creek. He crossed over Bear Mountain and camped at its foot. That night 
he heard a song.

Haii, haii Agwah wi-yoh Haii, haii Agwah wi-yoh

So the song began. Haii, haii, it is good indeed. Haii, haii, it is good indeed. 
Its words were words of peace, and he put that song in his heart and held it.
The next morning he climbed the mountain. There he

saw a wonderful sight. A corn plant was growing there on the mountaintop. It had 
four roots and five stalks, and on each stalk were three ears of corn. A great 
turtle with a red and yellow belly was dancing there near the corn plant dancing
the dance which we now call The Great Feather Dance.

"I heard singing last night," Aionwahta said.
"I was the one who sang," said the turtle. "This is the great corn. You will make 
the nations of the Longhouse like this. The five nations will grow from one plant, 
and the four roots will stretch to the north and the west, the south and the east."
Then Aionwahta put what he had seen and heard into his heart, and he continued on 
his way till he came to a group of lakes on a hill. There on the lake closest to 
him were so many ducks and geese that the surface of the lake could not be seen.
"Why are so many of you here?" Aionwahta said to the birds. At the sound of his 
voice they all flew up at once and carried with them all of the water from the 
lake. Then Aionwahta walked across the dry lake bed, where there were many small 
shells. As he walked among them, he

thought of his grief and he began to pick up the shells and place them in the 
deerskin pouch that he carried with him.
When he had gathered many shells, he continued on his way for two more days, until 
he came to an old abandoned cornfield and a shelter roofed with cornstalks. He
made a campfire there.

Then from the fibers of dried plants he made string, and
on the string he placed the shells. When he had made three strings of shells, he 
put two poles in the ground and laid another pole across them. Then he hung the 
three strings

of shells on the pole and sat there and began to talk to

himself. He talked about his grief and how it might be lifted. He bowed his head 
and talked about peace.
Now, as Aionwahta
had traveled from place to place, he had heard of a man who was among the Mohawk 
people. This man, it was said, was a messenger from the Creator. People called him 
the Peacemaker.
His coming had been foretold in a great dream which had been sent by the Creator to 
all of the leaders. In that dream they were told that the word of peace would be
brought to them by a man who was a holy messenger. But
even though the Peacemaker carried a great message, people were not listening to 
him. He was not a good speaker because he had been born with a double row of teeth. 
So when he spoke, his words did not come out clearly.
As Aionwahta spoke to himself the words of peace, he began to understand. One man 
alone could not bring peace. It had to be done by people working together.
"I must find the Peacemaker," Aionwahta said, and he turned toward the lands of the 
Mohawk people. Each night he camped and made a fire and hung the three strands of 
shells from a pole. Each night as he sat, he spoke of peace and said these words: 
"If I should see someone in grief, I would lift these shells from this pole and 
console him. The shells would become words, and the darkness would be lifted from 
him."
At last the smoke from his fire was seen by the chief man of another village. A 
messenger was sent. When the messenger returned and told of what he had seen--a man 
sitting by a fire, speaking of peace and the way to lift grief--the head man 
understood.
"This is Aionwahta, who has left his home at
Onondaga. We have heard of him. He is the one who will meet the great man, the 
Peacemaker. This, too, was foretold by the dream,"
So the head man sent a messenger, and Aionwahta was brought to the village. There 
he stayed until word came to them about where the Peacemaker was waiting. They 
traveled many days and when they came to the Peacemaker, the great man rose to his 
feet and said to Aionwahta, "Younger brother, I see that you are suffering." 
Although the Peacemaker's words were not clearly spoken, Aionwahta understood them. 
He told the Peacemaker of his grief. The Peacemaker listened to his words and took 
the strings of white shells that symbolized Aionwahta's many troubles.
"Now, younger brother," he said, "I shall lift your sorrow from you."
So it was that the first condolence was done and the first wampum strings were used 
by our people.

The Peacemaker and Aionwahta formed the plan for a Great League of Peace. The 
nations which had been at war would join together. They worked together for
five years establishing the Great League. Then they 

returned together to Onondaga. Adodarhonh, who had done all he could to work 
against this league, knew

they were coming. He hid himself so that no one could find him.
But among the Onondagas were two men who could transform themselves into animals. 
One of them became a bear and the other became a deer, and they went into the 
forest to seek Adodarhonh When they came back, they said, "We have found Adodarhonh 
He is terrible to see.
His body has seven great bends in it and his hair is filled with snakes."
Then the Peacemaker and Aionwahta went with a great multitude of people to the 
place where Adodarhonh was hiding. As they went, they sang the Peace Hymn which 
Aionwahta had taught the people, the song given him by the Great Turtle. Their 
powerful song pierced the air like the cry of the eagle. And they came at last, 
singing the Peace Hymn, to Adodarhonh's lodge. haii haii agwah wi-yoh haii 
haii agwah wi-yoh 


They sang to heal the mind of Adodarhonh, and when he heard the Hymn of Peace, he 
could not move.
Then the Peacemaker and Aionwahta entered Adodarhonh's lodge. The Peacemaker held 
out his hand and straightened Adodarhonh's body. Aionwahta combed the snakes from 
his hair. With his body and his mind healed, Adodarhonh stood and joined them.
Together they dug a hole in the earth and threw the weapons of war into it. Then 
they planted a pine tree there. The four roots of the pine stretched to the north 
and the west, the south and the east, just like the roots of the corn plant that 
Aionwahta saw. That tree stood for their League of Peace. Its roots were white, 
like the path of peace, and it was said that anyone could trace those roots back to 
the pine tree and sit under its branches in peace. On top of the pine tree they put 
an eagle, to keep watch and see if anyone was going to threaten the peace.
In its claws that eagle held five arrows, which stood for the five nations of our 
people. Alone, you can break one arrow easily. But when you tie five arrows 
together, it is hard to break them. That is the way we would be. United we would be 
strong. Together we would work for peace.
So the Great League of Peace was formed by our Iroquois people long ago.

Richard Bigtree paused. "You know what happened to Adodarhonh?"
Danny opened his eyes, almost surprised to see their apartment around them. "No," 
he answered.
"They set him up as the head of their Great League. To this day his name is passed 
down to the Onondaga chief who is chosen to head the great council meetings. You 
see, Son, we believe that a bad human being can be made into a good human being. 
They can even become leaders, so they can use their energy to do good instead of 
bad. That is our way."
Danny thought of Tyrone and Brad. "You going to tell that story to my class?"
"Think I should?
"I like that story. I think they need to hear it in my school."

"I think so too," Richard Bigtree said, running his fingers along the wings of the 
eagle of peace painted on his

hard hat.


the visit Ms. Mobry was writing on the board. She was talking as she wrote, but 
Danny couldn't hear her words. His heart was pounding so hard In his ears that he 
couldn't hear anything. It was like having his head under an invisible waterfall, a 
waterfall as loud as that one up near Saranac Lake where his father had taken him 
last summer

He looked up at the clock 

Wasn't  it ever going to be two

Danny shook his head and reed to focus on what Ms.
Mobry was doing. He watched her hands move. They

fluttered like birds as she wrote with the chalk and gestured. Then the buzzer on 
the intercom sounded. Danny heard that. He almost jumped up to answer it himself.
Ms. Mobry walked over to the intercom. He had never known she could walk so slowly. 
She pressed the button and Danny saw her lips shape the words. "Yes, what is it?"

As soon as she spoke those words, the invisible waterfall stopped flowing over his 
head. Danny could hear again. The usual garble of sounds that no one but teachers 
could understand came out of the intercom grille. Ms.
Mobry nodded. She looked over at Danny with a smile and nodded again.
"We have a special afternoon guest," she said to the class. "You can put your math 
away. We'll have our quiz tomorrow." Twenty-four heads looked up with relief.
"Yes," Danny whispered to himself, "perfect timing, Dad."
"Two people will have to go to the office to escort our guest to the classroom."
Ms. Mobry looked around the classroom at the raised

hands of volunteers sprouting up like small trees. Danny waited for her to call his 
name.
"Consuela and Tyrone."
Tyrone raised one eyebrow and then lowered it as his name was called. The other 
kids in the class laughed. Tyrone could always make them laugh. He raised his arms 
in triumph and started down the aisle. As he brushed by Danny's desk, Danny put his 
arms over his books. Maybe it had been an accident, but that morning as he walked 
by

Danny's desk, Tyrone had knocked everything onto the

floor with his elbow.

Consuela's desk was on the other side of the classroom.
As she walked across toward the door, she did a pirouette.
Another ripple of laughter ran through the classroom and Ms. Mobry joined in. 
Everybody knew Consuela was a dancer. That made her popular. She was nice to people 
too. Danny had to admit that. He was glad that Consuela was going to escort his 
father to the classroom. But Tyrone? That could be a disaster. What if Tyrone made 
fun

of his father?
The classroom door closed and Ms. Mobry was talking again.                                              


"We haven't begun our unit on Native nations yet. So before our guest comes, let me 
tell you a few things about the Iroquois." Ms. Mobry wrote IROQUOIS on the board. 
Then she told the class how the Iroquois call themselves the People of the 
Longhouse.
"They were a confederacy of Native nations living in the area we now call New York 
State," she said. "They were good farmers and hunters and great warriors when they 
defended their homes and their families." Danny knew all of that, but he smiled at 
what Ms. Mobry said

next.

"The Iroquois lived in long buildings called longhouses, not teepees," she said. 
Then she looked straight at Danny.
"Because I want you all to know that Native American people are not just part of 
the past, I have invited our special guest to come to class today. He's the father 
of one of our students. And here he is now!"
Danny looked toward the door. Lately he had been looking at that door a hundred 
times every day.
He would look at it worrying about what would happen when he went through it to go 
to gym. Just yesterday as they reached the door, someone had pushed him from
behind and he'd hit his elbow so hard on the doorjamb that he had to struggle to 
hold back the tears. He would stare at the doorway, thinking about how he'd be able 
to get through without bumping into Tyrone or Brad on his way to lunch. He had been 
looking at it waiting for the final bell so he could go through that door and go 
home This time, though, his father was standing in that dangerous doorway. It was 
so strange to see his father there with Consuela and Tyrone that Danny almost 
laughed.
But he didn't.
Consuela was smiling and looking up at Danny's father.
Danny knew that his father had probably said something funny. She was carrying the 
big leather bag that Danny's father always kept behind his chair in their living 
room.
Tyrone was carrying something too. It was Richard Bigtree's hard hat. As Danny 
watched, Tyrone put the hard hat down carefully on the little table Ms. Mobry had 
placed at the front of the room.
"Consuela and Tyrone, thank you. You may sit down now," Ms. Mobry said. "Class, 
this is Mr. Richard Bigtree, Daniel's father. He is a member of the Mohawk

Nation, one of the five nations that make up the Iroquois Confederacy."
Richard Bigtree flashed a smile at his son and then looked out around the class as 
he took something out of his bag.
"Who knows what this is?"
Danny knew what it was: a wampum belt. His father had made it, copying the design 
of the ancient Hiawatha Belt. On the belt in purple and white beads were the shapes 
of a tall tree and four squares, symbols of the founding of the Great League of 
Peace.
"Is it a headband?" someone said from the back of the room.
Danny's father shook his head.
"Is it a belt?" Consuela said.
"That's good," said Danny's father. "But what kind of belt is it?"
A boy named Kofi raised his hand on the other side of the room. Danny's father 
nodded to him.
"I know," Kofi said. "It's a wampum belt. I saw one at the museum last week."


"That's right," Danny's father said. "It's a wampum belt. To us it is like a book 
because it tells a story. Would you like to hear that story?"
"Yes," everyone said.
And Danny listened again as his father told the story of the coming of peace, the 
story of Aionwahta.

Danny's father finished his story and looked at the classroom. No one moved or said 
a word. He smiled.
"Has anyone ever seen that pine tree anywhere?" No one answered him. Then he held 
up his hard hat, and some of the kids laughed.
"It's on your hat," said a boy in the front row. Danny was surprised. The boy, 
whose name was Tim, was never the first to answer any question. Tim looked back at 
Danny and grinned.
Richard Bigtree nodded his head.
"One of the first flags that the United States used had a pine tree on it. The 
founders of this country, Benjamin Franklin in particular, knew about the Iroquois 
League.
Old Ben Franklin said that the colonists ought to band together like the Iroquois 
nations did. A lot of people who study how governments are made now think that the 
United States Constitution is partially modeled after the Iroquois. Any of you got 
a quarter?"
Everyone in the class began searching their pockets.
Danny, though, had been waiting for this moment. He had the quarter ready in his 
hand.
"Here, Dad," Danny said, tossing the quarter to him.
Richard Bigtree reached out one big hand and caught the quarter without even 
looking at it. He held it up.
"You see what's on one side of this? It's an eagle, just like the one on my hat. 
Just like the one on top of that big pine tree. What's it holding?"
Brad raised his hand. "I know," he said. "It's holding thirteen arrows. They stand 
for the thirteen colonies." "Just like our Iroquois eagle that holds five arrows 
standing for the five Iroquois nations."
"Awesome," Brad said.
Tyrone had his hand up now. Richard Bigtree nodded to him.
"What happened to that Adodarhonh dude?" Tyrone said.
"Any ideas?" Richard Bigtree said.

"Maybe they put him on trial and then sent him to the electric chair," said Tyrone. 
The class laughed.
Richard Bigtree laughed too, but he shook his head.
"No, that's not what they did."
"Did they banish him?" Consuela said.
"No." Mr. Bigtree explained what he had told Danny, about how a bad human being 
could be made into a good one. "If you believe in peace, then an enemy can become a 
friend," he said.
Tyrone started to raise his hand again, but just then the bell rang. Ms. Mobry 
stood and held her hands up, palms toward the class.
"Everyone," she said, "tomorrow is Friday and we will have that test then. So be 
prepared. Now, before we leave, let's give Mr. Bigtree a round of applause to thank 
him for taking the time to share his wonderful story." The class exploded into 
applause and Danny's father smiled back at them. He looked at Danny and 
winked.
Danny winked back. It was great that his father had come to school. But would the 
kids treat him better now?
the longest day Although June 21 was supposed to be the longest day of the year, 
Danny knew that wasn't so. Friday, any Friday when there was school, was really the 
longest day. Friday always crept by so slowly. It taunted you because you knew that 
when it was over, it would be the weekend.
This Friday already seemed as if it was going to be even longer than most. Not only 
was there going to be an afternoon test, it was also the day after his father came 
to class.
Danny had hoped that things would be better today--but so far, things had been 
worse.

It had started with the phone call last night. The phone had bern ringing when the 
two of them got home from Danny's school. Richard Bigtree had another building 
project  to go to. A microwave tower near Philadelphia. Usually there'd be some 
downtime between jobs, but this one was a hurry-up deal. The tower was half-done 
and some of the crew that had been working on it had quit. They'd be working over 
the weekend, but the pay would be even better than usual. Danny's father had to go 
because he was the chief of his connecting crew. The connectors were the ones who 
worked on the very top of the structure being built.
So, early that Friday morning, even before Danny woke up, his father left. He'd go 
straight from Philadelphia to the Pittsburgh job. He wouldn't be back for two whole 
weeks
Danny stayed in bed, not wanting to get up. His mother was in such a bad mood that 
Danny knew he couldn't talk to her. She banged the dishes in the kitchen sink while 
she was washing them, and then she dropped something.
Danny heard it fall to the floor and shatter. Then everything became quiet.
Danny began to worry about his mother, He padded into the kitchen in his slippers 
to help her pick up the pieces. But she was just sitting on the floor and crying.
Danny put his arm around her and patted her on the back the way his father always 
did with him. But it didn't work. It just made her cry harder.
"Mom," Danny finally said, trying to make his voice deep and certain like his 
father's, "you got to go to work." "I know," his mom said. "Thank you, Daniel." 
That worried Danny even more. His mother only called him Daniel when she was upset 
with him or when she was really, really sad. But she got up off the floor.

As his mother got her things together, Danny came up and stood beside her. "Mom, 
I'm going to walk you to the station."
"You don't have time. You'll be late to school," his mother said.
"You could give me a note," Danny suggested.
His mom thought about that. "Okay," she said.
Danny stayed close to his mother's side all the way to her subway station, and she 
hugged him hard before going

down the steps. He waited until she was out of sight, then turned and walked the 
other way to his station.
Danny had never been late for school before and he wasn't quite sure what to do 
when he arrived and saw the familiar front yard of the school completely empty of 
kids.
It was so quiet! He walked through the front door and nodded to Mr. Kinkaid, the 
uniformed security guard.
Mr. Kinkaid was cool. He was almost seven feet tall and had been a basketball 
player. He was from Jamaica and spoke with an accent that Danny really liked. A lot 
of the kids liked Mr. Kinkaid's way of saying things. You could sometimes hear them 
imitating the way he said things, especially "man." Mr. Kinkaid said it as if there 
were several extra letters in the word.
"Mahhnn," Mr. Kinkaid said, looking down at Danny and shaking his head, "you lose 
your wristwatch?" Danny shook his head and Mr. Kinkaid smiled.
"Through the doorway."
Mr. Kinkaid took Danny's lunch box and looked in it as Danny walked through one of 
the four metal detectors.
Two years ago a fifth grader had brought his father's loaded into the school. Now 
going through the metal

detectors was a part of the routine of every school day.
You are clean, mahhnn," Mr. Kinkaid said, handing Danny back his lunch box. Danny 
paused, uncertain what to do.
Mr. Kinkaid bent down. "What's the matter?" he said.
"Don't you know what to do when you're late like this "Danny shook his head.
Do you have a note from your mother?" Danny nodded.
Mr. Kinkaid stood up straight again and smiled. "No problem, mahhnn," he said. 
"Show the note at the office, then go to your room."
Mrs. Carter, the administrative secretary in the office, took Danny's note without 
even looking up from her desk. She glanced at it, nodded, and jotted something down 
on a sheet. Then she reached out to press a button on the console in front of her 
and spoke into the microphone.
"Ms. Mobry," she said, "Daniel Bigtree. Excused tardy.
On his way to class now."
Mrs. Carter looked up at Danny. "Remember the way?" she said.

Danny nodded, but he didn't move. He felt like everything around him was moving in 
slow motion. It was almost like a dream where your feet are covered with glue and 
you can't move them to run or walk.
"Then go to your classroom.
Danny turned and moved his feet, unsticking them from the floor one step at a time. 
The hall was long and, except for the sound of his feet, quiet. He remembered a 
movie he had seen on TV. In one scene someone was walking down a long corridor with 
many doors in it. The person walked and walked, and then all of a sudden a monster 
jumped out and grabbed him. Danny pictured that monster looking a little like a 
cross between Tyrone and Adodarhonh in his father's story. The monster would be 
even taller than Mr. Kinkaid and it would roar at him as it jumped our of the 
doorway.
But Danny made it to the door of his classroom without a monster getting him. He 
reached out his hand for the doorknob and paused. Had his father's visit made a 
difference? Or would things be just the way they were before? When he opened the 
door, it made one of the loudest sounds Danny had ever heard. Everyone looked at 
him as

he closed the door behind himself and stood there. Someone laughed.

"Take your seat, Daniel," Ms. Mobry said. Then she started reading again. Danny 
liked this book, but today he hardly heard it. He was looking at the clock again, 
hoping it would magically leap ahead and it would be time for recess. But the clock 
still moved slowly.
One breath in and one breath out is at least a second, Danny thought. If I breathe 
in and out sixty times, it'll be a minute.

Tick by tick and breath by breath, the morning crept past. One minute, five 
minutes, ten minutes. It was endless. Then, somehow, it was time
for them to go outside.
Danny walked out into
the school yard, trying to act casual. People usually didn't notice him. Why should 
today be any different? But Consuela was waving at him. He looked around. Maybe 
there was someone behind him she was waving to? No,
there was nobody else. She was smiling, and she motioned for him to come over to 
the place where she stood with a group of other kids by the swings.
Danny began to walk across the end of the basketball Court to reach the swing set.


"Yo, Hiawatha!" someone yelled.
Danny turned to look. It was Tyrone, standing twenty feet away from him.
"Here!" Tyrone shouted. He threw the basketball he had been holding straight at 
Danny.
Danny tried to get his hands up in time. He couldn't.
The basketball came flying at him, getting bigger and bigger until it was all he 
could see. It hit him square in the face. There was a blinding light and a sharp 
pain all at once. Danny went down onto one knee and put a hand up to his face over 
his mouth and nose. One of the fifth-grade teachers, a man whose name Danny wasn't 
sure of, was coming over to him. Mr. Rosario? Mr. Mario? His nose was aching now 
and his mouth felt warm and moist. He had to remember the name of the teacher.
As the teacher helped him up, Danny saw Tyrone. He hadn't moved. His mouth was open 
and he was staring at Danny. Brad grabbed Tyrone's arm and pulled at him. The two 
boys turned and ran away.
"What happened?" the teacher said. Mr. Rosario. That was his name.
"I..." Danny tried to talk, but his mouth was full of

blood. His nose was bleeding too, and it was dripping onto the pavement of the 
school yard.
"Madre de Dios," Mr. Rosario said. He quickly pulled out some Kleenex tissues and 
pressed them against Danny's nose.
"I slipped and hit my face on the ground," Danny said.
He saw Consuela out of the corner of his eye. She had heard what he said.
"Just hold these tissues right," Mr. Rosario said. "I'll get you in to the nurse."

By the time Danny reached the nurse's office, a strange thing had begun to happen. 
The day which had crept along like a snail had started to go faster and faster. 
Somehow, as he sat there and the nurse took care of him, it became lunchtime. 
Someone had brought his lunch box.
"You'd better eat," said the nurse. "That was some gusher you had, kiddo! Your nose 
isn't broken, but you lost a lot of blood. You might feel a little light-headed, so 
you got to get some food into you, laddie."
Danny ate. The cut on his lip didn't hurt much when he ate. His nose still felt 
like it was twice as big as his face, though. When he was done, he looked up at the 
clock.
Another hour had gone by. He started to stand up when the nurse came back in, then 
sat down again, feeling dizzy.
"Whoa there," she said. "You look like you need to take it easy. Let's get you to 
this cot."
Danny let the nurse lead him to the bed.
"I called your mother," the nurse said as Danny put his head down on the pillow. 
"Just so there'll be someone to make sure you get home okay. She's leaving work 
early to pick you up."
Danny closed his eyes. It didn't seem as if he slept, but when he opened his eyes 
again his mother was sitting next to the cot, holding her purse.
"Are you okay?" His mother's voice, calm but concerned, made him feel better.
"I'm fine. Maybe I ought to go back to class." "On Monday," his mother said. She 
looked up at the clock.
Danny looked up at the clock too. School had been out for half an hour! It was past 
time to go home. Somehow this longest day had become one of the shortest ones.


colors Danny woke up later than he had intended on Saturday.
He looked at the digital clock next to his bed. Danny liked that clock because it 
was green, a color that made him think of home back on the reservation. The green 
of the grass in the fields. The green of the trees. Even the St.
Lawrence River looked green sometimes. Green, green, green 
Danny liked to sleep a little late on the weekend but not this late. Weekend 
mornings there were TV shows he liked to watch. And most weekends his mother didn't 
have to work and they could go places together.


There was a park they liked. If they sat very still, the squirrels there would come 
right up and eat the peanuts that Danny and his mom placed on the ground. Sometimes 
they would go to the zoo. His favorite place there was the big flight cage with the 
eagles in it. Danny felt as if those eagles knew him. if he whistled to them, they 
would look at him and whistle back. Once one of them had flown down and landed on a 
branch so close to him, he could have reached through the wire and touched it. But 
he didn't. He knew that eagles were to be treated with 

respect.
Danny listened. He could hear his mom in the kitchen.
She'd call him soon to come and eat. She had to work this weekend. There was a 
special event at the American Indian Community House. But she was going to take him 
with her. Other people brought their children, and some of the kids were his own 
age. It was always easy to play with the other Indian kids. They understood the 
kind of problems he had in school because a lot of them had similiar problems. It 
wasn't easy being an Indian in the city.
"Danny," his mother called.

"I'm coming, Mom."
Even before the elevator door opened, Danny could hear the sound of kids running 
on 
the hardwood floor of the Community House. The door opened and there was will Tiger 
leaning against the wall. yah tah hey danno 
Will said yah tah hey was a Navajo way of saying hello. Will was Seminole and his 
family had originally come from Florida. But Will and Danny had heard a Navajo 
flute player perform at Community House, and now the two boys always greeted each 
other that way.
Danny said yah tah hey
will eyed the swelling around Danny's mouth and nose.
he didn't ask anything about it. Danny knew that Will wouldn't  say anything unless 
Danny told him about it first. For a  moment Danny thought about telling Will how 
Tyrone had hit him with the basketball. But as he thought that, Danny started 
wondering Had Tyrone really meant to hurt him with the basketball or was he just 
throwing it to him
will grabbed him by the arm "Come on, lets check out the gallery. there is  a cool 
new art show
Danny followed Will back into the gallery. Will was shorter than Danny, even though 
he was a year older. He went to a school in the Bronx where gangs were really 
important. In that school, after you got to fifth grade, just about everyone who 
was anyone had to belong to one gang or another.
As they walked, Danny noticed the red handkerchief that stuck out of Will's back 
pocket. The laces on Will's sneakers were red too. Those sneakers were the kind 
that a famous basketball star always wore. Everyone wanted sneakers like that, but 
Danny had never seen a pair with red laces. He stopped, staring down at the 
sneakers.
Will turned to look at him.

"You're in a gang now," Danny said.
"When you're in a gang, it's like a big family," Will said.

"Don't the gangs try to kill each other?" Danny said.
Will looked troubled. "If somebody disses you, you can't just let them do that. You 
got to be respected to be a man. The gangs are the future, Danny. They're going to 
be in every school. They're the only way you can survive." "What did your mom say?" 
Danny asked.

Will looked hard at him. Danny knew that if he hadn't been another Skin, a brother 
Indian, Will might have hit him for asking that
"She doesn't know about it. She doesn't have time to know about it."
Danny looked down at Will's sneakers. He felt sad and didn't know what to say. Will 
reached out and pulled Danny's sleeve.
"Come on, Danny. Let's look at the exhibit There's one that has a TV set in it and 
a whole bunch of things like windowpanes in front of it so that the picture 
reflects on all of them You got to see the colors! It's the kind of stuff I'm going 
to do when I'm an artist."
Danny didn't move. Will put his right hand on Danny's shoulder 
"Danno, he said, "I'm no different because I belong to a gang. I'm the same as I 
always was with you. You're my Indian brother" Will looked as sad as Danny felt.
Danny finally took hold of Will's elbow so that their arms were linked together
"Okay," Danny said. He didn't know what else to say.
But he knew it wasn't really okay.


a falling eagle  It wasn't a good dream. Danny sat up in bed, shaking his head to 
clear it away. The green numbers of the clock said it was only in the morning. The 
dream had left tears in his eyes. Danny felt like getting up and climbing into bed 
with his mother, even though he was much too old to do that.
He kept seeing the dream. In it a beautiful eagle sat on top of a pine tree, 
watching over the peaceful land below it. Suddenly something came spinning out of 
the sky toward the eagle. Danny could see that It was going to hit the eagle and 
knock it out of the tree. He tried to shout a

warning, but no words would come from his mouth.
He got up and looked out the window. There was dirty snow on the streets. The wind 
and snow had swept in the night before. It was too early in the year for snow like 
this, but it had come anyway. A few cars were moving slowly on the snowy street. It 
looked cold out there.
It was even colder than it looked. As Danny and his mother walked to church, the 
wind whipped at their coats. In the stories his father told him, the winter wind 
was an old man with long, skinny fingers. Danny shivered at the feel of those cold 
fingers touching his skin.
By the time church ended, the sun had come out and the wind was gone. His father 
would be at work now. Danny looked up at the tops of the tallest buildings. He 
imagined men working up there, guiding the steel girders into place and connecting 
them together. They would use longhandled spud wrenches, like his father's, to turn 
the big steel bolts.
By late afternoon the wind had come back again. The sun was hidden behind a dark 
cloud and more snow was falling. Danny watched out the window, wondering what the 
weather was like near Philadelphia. On the map in his classroom it was farther south
than new york city. maybe it was warmer there. it probably wasn't snowing. danny 
thought again about his dream and then pushed it out of his mind. The phone rang and 
danny jumped. he ran into the other room but his mother had already taken it off 
the wall. yes, this is salli bigtree. danny stopped in front of his mother. someone
was talking on the other end. the voice sounded like the buzzing of a fly. his 
mother's forehead was creased with worry lines as she listened and her eyes were 
shut. 
 
"What happened?" his mother said. The fly buzzed again at the other end of the 
line. "I don't care about that, is he all right?" His mother turned her back to 
Danny and leaned her head against the wall.
Again the fly buzzed as Danny tried to understand what was being said. He knew what 
the call was about. He felt like a fist had been shoved into his stomach. His 
mother hung up the phone. She turned back to him.
"There's been an accident," she said. "Your father was hurt and we're going to him. 
Now." She paused. "I'll pack
some clothes and your toothbrush for you. You get your coat."

Danny held his mother's hand as they sat in the subway car. He kept on holding it 
as they climbed onto the bus at the Port Authority Terminal. The rumble of the 
wheels under their seat was comforting to Danny. It reminded him of the trip they'd 
made a month ago up north to go back home to the rez and visit his grandparents on 
Cornwall Island in the middle of the St. Lawrence River.
As they sat in the bus, neither of them said much. Every ironworker's family knew 
that accidents could happen.
But Danny had never believed his father could get hurt.
He still couldn't believe it.
"He'll be okay. Right, Mom?"
"That's right, Danny," his mother said. But he could hear the worry in her voice.
His mother had thrown some food for them into a paper bag. An orange, two apples, 
some packages of crackers with cheese on them, a box of Oreo cookies. Every half 
hour they would eat something. By the time the bag was empty, it was late. Danny 
leaned his head against his
mother's shoulder. He didn't want to fall asleep. He was afraid he would dream 
again. But he was very tired and so he closed his eyes. When he opened them again, 
there were lights all around the bus and it was slowing down.
"Philadelphia," his mother said to him.
The wind was blowing in Philadelphia too, but there was no snow on the ground. They 
caught a taxi outside the bus terminal. Danny was still tired and his eyes kept 
closing as he sat in the taxi. It didn't seem to take them long to reach the 
hospital.

There was a man in coveralls sitting in a chair outside the door of the hospital 
room they were told to go to. He didn't look Indian, though Danny knew you couldn't 
ever be sure. Some Mohawks had blue eyes and blond hair.
He stood up. "Hi, Mrs. Bigtree," he said "Hal Weisser.
We met before. I'm Rick's pusher."

Danny's mother nodded and Danny nodded too. He knew that the pusher was the 
foreman, the man with the blueprints. He and his mother were ready to go into the 
room and see Danny's father, but this man wanted to talk.
He needs to talk, Danny thought

"He's okay, you know," Hal Weisser said. "What he did was he saved a man's life. It 
was because of the crane operator. Nobody knew he'd been drinking. I signaled him 
to raise the load."
Hal Weisser pointed his finger toward the ceiling and made a circle with it. Danny 
knew that signal. His father had taught him all the different hand signals that 
were used on the job.
"But instead, what he did was lower the girder. It hit the column and it spun. It 
woulda knocked Elbert Hill right off if your husband hadn't jumped over, just like 
a cat, onto the girder Elbert was on to pull him back. That spinning girder just 
grazed Rick, but it was enough to break his leg and knock him off the tower."
Hal Weisser was talking louder and moving his hands as he talked.
"Never saw nothing like it before. I was watching from twelve stories down." He 
looked at Danny, as if seeing him for the first time. "Your father?"
Danny nodded.
"Your father, I thought he was a goner. But he spread his arms out like they was 
wings and grabbed the beam

ten foot below him as he was falling. That's when he broke his ribs. But he still 
hung on there until the men on the bolting crew could grab his belt and pull him 
in." Hal Weisser paused. "He's mad at me cause I called you. Did I do the wrong 
thing?"
Danny's mother took Hal Weisser by the hand and then kissed him on the cheek. "You 
did the right thing," she said.
Hal Weisser's face got as red as a stoplight. "He was awake the last time I looked 
in. Now you're here, I guess I'll go back to the motel."

Richard Bigtree's face was pale. The white sheets and the hospital gown made it 
look paler still. He opened his eyes as they came in and he smiled. He looked 
better when he smiled.
"I didn't want them to tell you right away," he said. "I didn't want you to worry. 
It's just a busted leg and three cracked ribs."
"We're not worried," Danny's mother said. "We're here." She leaned over and kissed 
Danny's father and hugged him.

"Now I got four cracked ribs," Danny's father said. All three of them laughed.

While Danny's mother went to get coffee for them from the machine down the hall, 
Danny sat with his father.
"Dad," he said, "I had a dream last night. I saw something fall from the sky and 
knock an eagle out of a tree. It

was scary."
Danny's father was silent for what seemed to be a long time. Then he nodded and 
reached his hand out to place it

on Danny's chest.
"Danny," he said, "dreams are important things. You should always listen to them. 
But don't let them scare you.

Okay?"
"Okay, Dad."
"Looks like I'll be home for a while. Maybe I'll put that degree I got from 
Potsdam College to work and do some substitute teaching. Doesn't pay like ironwork 
does, but you don't get your ribs broke when you fall off a desk." Danny laughed, 
but it was a short laugh. His father's joke had made him remember school.
Danny's father looked closely at him. "What happened

to your nose and your lip.
"Basketball."
"I didn't know you played."
"I don't. Tyrone hit me in the face with his basketball." Danny hadn't meant to 
cry, but there were tears in his eyes

Danny's father nodded. "Things didn't get better right away after I visited the 
school, eh?"
"No."
"It's hard to believe in peace, Danny. There's a lot of danger in the world. Things 
happen when you don't expect them. There's so many people who will tell you that it 
doesn't make any sense to believe in peace. But it takes a lot more courage to make 
a friend sometimes than it does to make an enemy. Having friends is a risky thing, 
you might say."
"Elbert Hill is your friend, isn't he?"
Danny's father chuckled. "You could say that. He's gotten me in trouble more than 
once, though. I ever tell you how we tipped over his grandmother's outhouse when we 
were kids? When his grandmother asked at dinner about who did it, we confessed. His 
grandmother had told us about how when George Washington was a little boy he

cut down his father's cherry tree. And when George confessed, he didn't get 
punished because he told the truth.
You know that story, don't you?"
Danny nodded.
Danny's father chuckled again and pressed his hand to his side.
"Got to remember not to laugh with these cracked ribs.
So when Elbert and I confessed, we figured we would be home free. But Elbert's 
grandmother grabbed him and started swatting him on the butt with her cane. Elbert 
hollered out, When George Washington confessed that he cut down his father's cherry 
tree, his father didn't whomp him. And Elbert's grandma, she hollered, George 
Washington's father was not in that cherry tree when it got cut down!"
Danny shook his head and then began to laugh.
Cracked ribs and all, his father laughed with him. Everything was going to be okay 
after all.

peace Danny missed school on Monday. They spent the day bringing his father back home. He 
wasn't hurt so badly that he needed to stay the hospital.
"I'd rather save my health insurance for sometime when I really need it," he 
said.
On Tuesday Danny's father wrote the note for Danny to take to school to explain his 
absence. As Danny started out the door, his father called out to him.
"Danny?-

"Yeah, Dad?"
she'kon
she'kon

Dad."
Danny arrived at school early enough so the morning bell had not yet rung. Lots of 
kids were still outside.
Tyrone and Brad were there by the steps, tossing their basketball back and forth 
between them.
Danny took a deep breath and walked toward them. He stopped when he was six feet 
from the boys.
"Yo!" Brad said. He backed away.
Tyrone stared at Danny, but Danny didn't move.
"You want to fight me, man?" Tyrone said.
Danny shook his head. "Not unless I have to." "Are you okay?" Tyrone said. "I 
didn't mean to hit you so hard with the ball."
"I'm okay."
Tyrone smiled. "Anyhow, Hiawatha, you cool. You didn't tell on me."
Danny didn't smile back. "My name isn't Hiawatha.
And it isn't Chief. My name is Daniel."
Tyrone laughed. "Okay, Daniel. So what you want?" "I just don't want us to be 
enemies," Danny said.
"Maybe we could be friends." He held out his hand. she'kon
That means peace."

Tyrone took his hand.
"We're not enemies," Tyrone said.she'kon man." Then the bell rang, calling them 
into school.

That night, just before he went to bed, Danny walked over to look out his window 
again. It was hard to see much in the dark, but the snow on the streets didn't look 
as dirty. He looked out from the window for a long time.
He thought of all the people going by in the cars below, about the people behind 
the other lighted windows of this city and the other cities, people who needed to 
hear a hymn of peace. He thought about Will Tiger and the other kids who felt they 
had to join gangs to belong.
He knew that he wanted to be like Aionwahta. He wanted to be like his father. He 
wanted to always hold that song of peace in his heart. He would talk to Will about 
the idea of peace when they were together again.
Maybe Will would be ready to listen.

