exploring countries italy


where is italy
switzerland 
austria
slovenia
france
san marino
elba adriatic sea
rome
italy
sardinia
tyrrhenian sea
strait of messina
ionian sea
greece
sicily
mediterranean sea

Italy is a nation in southern Europe that covers 116,348 square miles 
(301,340 square kilometers). In the north, Italy borders France, Switzerland, 
Austria, and Slovenia. The rest of Italy covers a long peninsula that stretches 
into the Mediterranean Sea. This region includes the independent nations of San 
Marino and Vatican City. Vatican City is located in Rome which is the capital of 
Italy. East of the Italian Peninsula is the Adriatic Sea, and to the west is the 
Tyrrhenian Sea. The Ionian Sea separates the coastlines of Italy and Greece. 
Several Mediterranean islands, including Sardinia and Elba, also belong to Italy. 
Sicily, Italy's largest island, lies across the Strait of Messina. 
>> Fun Fact
>> Vatican City is the home of the Catholic Church and is governed by the Pope. 
It is the smallest country in the world!
>> 
>> 


the land
Italy has mountains, river valleys, plains, and long seacoasts. The Apennine 
Mountains run through the center of the country. The peaks of the steep Alps and 
Dolomites rise in the north. Italy shares the slopes of Monte Bianco, or White 
Mountain, with France. With a height of 15,770 feet (4,807 meters), this mountain 
is the tallest in Europe. It is one of the few mountains in Italy that is tall 
enough for glaciers to cover its peak. Italy has many rivers. The Po is the 
longest river in Italy. It waters a wide, fertile valley in the north and 
empties into the Adriatic Sea. The Arno flows through the center of Florence, 
and the Tiber travels through Rome. 
>> 

Fun Fact
>> Ancient alpine glaciers formed Lake Como, Lake Garda, and Lake Maggiore. 
All of these lakes are long and narrow. They lie in the mountainous regions 
of northern Italy.  dolomites

mount vesuvius 
>> Mount Vesuvius, the only active volcano on Europe's mainland, rises near 
the city of Naples. Its most famous eruption happened almost 2,000 years ago
 during the time of the Roman Empire. Hot ash from the volcano buried Pompeii 
and other nearby cities.
>> 
>> The ash preserved many of Pompeii's streets, shops and temples. Archaeologists
 have dug up a large part of the city so that visitors can walk through it. 
Today, Pompeii looks much like it did 2,000 years ago. Vesuvius has not 
erupted since 1944. If it erupts again, the more than 3 million people living 
near its slopes will be in danger.
>> Fun Fact
>> Archaeologists uncovered ancient Roman bakeries along with the ruins of 
temples and houses. They even found bread that was baking in the ovens when 
Mount Vesuvius erupted!  pompeii temple ruins
>> 
>> 

wildlife
porcupine

Italy is home to many kinds of wildlife. Porcupines, red deer, hares, and 
wolves roam in the Apennine Mountains. Chamois and black bears wander through 
the Alps. The marmot, a kind of squirrel that lives in the ground, can be found 
throughout the mountainous regions of Italy. many different birds and ocean 
animals inhabit the islands and waters of Italy. On Sardinia, pink flamingos 
nest in coastal wetlands. Hawks and eagles migrate to Sicily and southern 
Italy in the spring. Sharks, tuna, dolphins, and swordfish swim in the seas 
around Italy.
>> Did you know?
>> Thousands of wild boars live in the forests and mountains of Italy. With 
their powerful tusks, they dig in the soil for tasty insects, small animals, 
and roots. Farmers don't like boars destroying their fields, so a busy boar-
hunting season begins in the fall.
pink flamingos
chamois
wild boar
>> 
>> 

the people
Around 58 million people live in Italy. Italians have ancestors from many 
regions in and around modern Italy. Many immigrants have come to Italy from 
Albania, Greece, Morocco, Romania, and recently China. These immigrants have 
brought their customs and languages with them to Italy. 
>> Today, most Italians live in the northern part of the country. Southern Italy,
 known as Mezzogiorno, has fewer big cities than the north. Almost all Italians 
speak Italian, the country's official language.
 Speak Italian!
 English hello good-bye yes no please thank you friend (male) friend (female) 
italian



daily life    
Most Italians live in large cities. Cars, taxis, buses, and motorbikes crowd
 city streets in Italy as people rush to work or school. In the countryside, 
life moves at a slower pace. Once or twice a day, farmers visit the nearest 
town or village to shop and chat with friends. 
>> Did you know?
>> Most Italians belong to the Roman Catholic Church. Every city and village 
has at least one church, usually in the center of town. Every day, bells ring 
to call people to mass. 
>> 
>> Fun Fact
>> The city of Rome has been around for over 2,000 years. The modern city is 
built among the ruins of ancient Roman buildings like the Colosseum!
>> Many people enjoy walking through the streets and plazas, or piazzas, of 
italy's cities. They visit shops that sell shoes, clothing, food, or 
newspapers and books. In the evening, families gather together for a meal. 
This is the day's most important event. Afterward, they may enjoy a show on 
television or go out to see a movie. where people live in italy countryside cities
>> 
> 
> 

going to school
In Italy, everyone starts school when they are 6 years old, and they must 
attend until they are 16. Students spend their first year in 
or kindergarten. Then they attend elementary school, or 
where they study math, science, Italian, history, and geography. Elementary 
school lasts for five years.
> Middle school, or  media, follows and lasts for three years. Students 
continue with math and Italian and begin to study foreign languages as well as 
art, drama, and music. If they wish to go on to high school, they must pass an 
exam. If they pass, they choose between high schools that prepare them for 
university or high schools that prepare them for specific jobs.
> Fun Fact
> The University of Bologna is the oldest university in Europe. It is thought 
that classes began meeting there in 1088. That was more than 900 years ago!
> 
> 

working 
Did you know?
> Ferrari is an Italian car company that was started in 1929. The Ferrari Enzo
 can reach speeds up to 225 miles (32 kilometers) per hour. Only 400 Enzos were
 ever made. 
> 
> Italy is one of the most productive countries in the world. In cities, factory
 workers make tires, machinery, and chemicals. Some of the world's fastest sports
 cars are designed and made in Italy. There are also thousands of small workshops
 where Italians make clothing, shoes, and handbags. Many Italians have service 
jobs. They work in banks, hospitals, and schools. Workers in retail stores, 
hotels, and restaurants also serve the millions of tourists who visit every 
year. 
Much of the farming in Italy is done in the Po River Valley. Farmers grow 
wheat, rice, tomatoes, and grapes. Southern Italy has many orchards where 
olive, fig, and citrus trees are grown.  where people work in italy manufacturing
farming services 

playing
Italians spend most of their free time playing sports. The most popular 
sport in Italy is calcio, or soccer. Basketball is another favorite of 
Italians. They call the sport  People in Italy also enjoy 
traveling around their country. Adventurous Italians cycle, camp, or hike 
through Italy's rugged landscape. 
Fun Fact
Italy had a professional basketball league in 1920, more than 25 years 
before the national basketball association  formed in the United States. opera


There are also many historic sites and beautiful churches to visit in Italy. 
Museums display some of the world's most famous works of art by Italian 
painters and sculptors. Many Italians enjoy going to shows, especially 
movies and plays. opera, a type of dramatic play set to music, was invented
 in Italy. 

food
Italian food is rich and filling. Pasta is part of almost every meal. It comes 
in many different shapes. In the north, people also eat a rice dish called 
risotto. Many Italian dishes are prepared with olive oil. 
Fun Fact
The average Italian eats more than 60 pounds (27.2 kilograms) of pasta 
every year. 

For most Italians, breakfast is a light meal of bread or pastries served 
with coffee. Lunch is a midday snack. People crowd small shops that sell 
pizza, pasta, or calzones, which combine meat, cheese, and vegetables 
inside a crust. Dinner is the largest meal of the day and is eaten late in 
the evening. It includes soup, salad, one or two main courses, and dessert. 
Gelato is an Italian dessert similar to ice cream, but it is heavier and has 
a stronger flavor. Many adults enjoy espresso after dinner. calzone gelato 

holidays
Fun Fact
Italians celebrate carnevale a few months before Easter. The town of Viareggio 
is famous for its large floats and magnificent parades.

On national holidays, Italians get time off from work or school. Many of these
 holidays, such as Easter or Christmas, are religious holidays. Most Italians 
are Roman Catholic. August 15 is Ferragosto, or the feast of the assumption. 
This holiday honors the virgin Mary, an important figure to catholics. Other
 holidays celebrate Italy's history. On April 25, the country celebrates the 
end of World War with Liberation Day. Republic Day, on June 2, marks the 
day in 1946 when Italians voted to establish a republic. On this day, Rome 
and other cities throw grand parades. ferragosto

venice

One of the most famous cities in Italy is Venice. It rises in the middle of a 
large lagoon. To escape an invasion, the ancient Venetians built their city 
on top of 117 small islands. They established a republic that lasted for over
 1,000 years before Venice became part of Italy.
There are no cars in Venice. People get around on foot or by boat. Motorboats 
and gondolas travel up and down about 150 small canals. The Grand Canal is 
the main waterway of Venice. Narrow walkways are lined with shops and houses 
that are hundreds of years old. Piazza San Marco is the heart of Venice. 
Millions of tourists visit it every year to learn about Italian art, history, 
and culture. 
Fun Fact

Venice has over 400 Bridges, 3000 alleys, and 450 souvenir shops. 
Did You Know?
Venice has a problem with acqua alta, or high water. Once in a while, 
the sea floods the entire city. To stay dry, people must walk on temporary
 wooden sidewalks. 

Fast Facts about Italy
Italy's flag
The flag of Italy is made up of three vertical bands. The bands are green,
 white, and red. The colors come from old emblems of Milan, a city in 
northern Italy. The government of Italy officially adopted the flag in 
1948, after the modern republic was founded.

Official Name Italian Republic
Area   116348 square miles (301340 square kilometers); Italy is the 71 
largest country in the world. 
Capital City   Rome
Important Cities   Milan, Naples, Turin, Florence, Venice, Genoa, Bologna
Population  58090681 (July 2010)
Official Language Italian
National Holiday  Republic Day (June 2)
Religions Christian (90%), Other (10%)
Major Industries farming, manufacturing, services, tourism 
Natural Resources coal, iron ore, marble, mercury, natural gas, zinc
Farm Products cheese, citrus, fruits, corn, wheat, grapes, olives, rice, tomatoes, 
figs, wine
Unit of Money  euro; the euro is divided into 100 cents
manufactured products appliances cars clothing food products
machinery steel chemicals 

ciao
pallacanestro	
scuola
si
amica