face to face with wolves 


If you want to follow wolves in the wild, you have to think like a wolf. 

Wolves are very aware of their surroundings. 
Most of the time they are watching you before you see them. 

i grew up on the flat and treeless prairie. 
That's where I first began dreaming about seeing a wild wolf. 
Wolves were my favorite animals as a boy, even though they were extinct on the prairie. 
I had seen them only in photos and paintings. 
When I was finally old enough to drive, I set out for the North Woods of Minnesota. 
I knew wolves still lived there, and I hoped to photograph one. 
But I could not find any in the deep dense woods. 
They were there, of course, but I didn't know how to look for them.

Face to face

What Big Eyes You Have!
Throughout history, wolves have inspired both fear and admiration.
They have been our hunting partners, our competitors, and our guides.
This is why nearly every culture has folk stories about wolves.
Fairy tales like little Red Riding Hood reflect the fear that Europeans felt for wolves.
In Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book and in the myth of Romulus and Remus, baby boys were raised by wolves.
To some Native Americans, wolves were spirit guides who were revered for their hunting abilities.

Years later, I jumped at the chance to travel to the high Arctic, far north in Canada, 
for National Geographic. The white wolves there are usually not afraid of people, since they see so few humans.
They are curious about us.
When I arrived on Ellesmere Island, just west of Greenland, I saw my first pack of seven white arctic wolves. 
I followed them as they headed toward an iceberg. The leader of the pack was the first to see me. 
He looked at me without fear, letting me know there was no way I would sneak up on him. 
He went on walking and climbing to what was clearly his favorite spot on the iceberg, a shelf halfway up. 
He sat down to watch me still clumsily trying to catch up to him. 
When I got as close to him as I could, we stared at each other. 
I looked at him through my powerful telephoto lens. After all these years, I was finally face to face with my favorite 
animal.
During that first summer, the wolves became used to seeing me around. 
I felt like I was part of the pack. I was able to follow them as they hunted musk oxen and then brought the food back 
to feed their pups, six cute little waddling, gray bundles of fur. 
I watched the pups romp and play,
I left the Arctic after three summers, sad to go but excited, too. 
I would take what I had learned about wolf behavior and begin looking for gray wolves in my new home, the 
Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness in northern Minnesota--the wolf country of my boyhood dreams. 
My wife and co-author, Judy, and I have lived in this beautiful, wild place for 30 years--with wolves for neighbors.

High on his iceberg throne, the leader of the pack surveys his territory. I named him Buster, after my father, 
the leader of my family's pack. 

A wolf howls to communicate with the rest of the pack. The sound can be heard many miles away. 

That photograph of the wolf on the iceberg turned out to be the most important picture I would ever make. 
I shot six frames before Buster left, but because of the cold, and my nervousness, only one turned out the way I hoped. 
Since then, I've learned more about wolves and how to gain their trust.
There are two species of wolves in North America: the red wolf and the most common, the gray wolf (Canis lupus). 
Gray wolves live around the world, primarily in the northern climates.

A young wolf pup explores his surroundings after his mother moved the pups to a new area, out in the open. 

Meet the Wolf

The resident wolf pack in my backyard in Minnesota. Just 35 years ago, when I started photographing them, 
wolves were one of the most hated animals in the world. 
Today, they are one of the most loved. My photographs may have helped change attitudes- 
when you do something you care about, you can really make a difference. 

Wolf families are called packs. The pack consists of a mother and father, called the alpha pair, and their offspring. 
The alpha female and alpha male are the leaders of the pack. 
The pups usually stay with the pack for two or three years. 
When they are grown, one of them might become the pack leader- or the alpha pair might drive them away. 
They then become lone wolves, who may someday join with other lone wolves to mate and form new packs.


The average wolf pack is 6 to 8 wolves. 
A pack of 20 wolves, including 5 pups, recently lived near me in northern Minnesota. 
This unusually large pack eventually split. 
The alpha pair remained nearby, and the new pack went off to set up its own territory. 
Wolves are territorial. They will travel great distances, about 30 miles (48 km) a day, to patrol their boundaries and 
to find food.

Wolves used to live all over the world, in North America, Asia, and Europe. 
The map below shows the range of the gray and red wolf species today. (The arctic wolf is a subspecies of gray.)
north america 
south america
africa
europe
asia
australia
antarctica
miles
kilometers
approximate wolf ranges
gray wolf
subspecies artic wolf
red wolf
land area without wolves



Wolves seem to be always on the move, mostly searching for food. 
But they are also on the lookout for danger. 
They can be killed if they wander into another pack's territory. 
Humans, and their traps, pose another threat.

The low spring sun highlights the thick winter fur of this arctic wolf.
The coloration of a gray wolf  can range from black to white, with many shades of blondish, gray-brown in between.
Wolves are social animals, which means they live and cooperate with other wolves. 
They have many ways to communicate. Smells, sounds, facial expressions, and body language can relay messages.
A wolf howl is one of nature's most interesting sounds. 
Wolves greet one another, show their location, and define their territory by howling. 
They can track the rest of the pack and warn off others.

Wolves sleep as much us 12 hours at a time.
Upon waking, one wolf howls to the others to wake them up. 
The rest of the adults slowly get up, stretch, bow to each other, howl, and then depart on their hunt. 
I love being awakened at night by the sound of a  wolf pack howling nearby.

Wolves are famous for howling, but they can communicate in lots of other ways, too. 
They growl, whimper, and use body language. 
A wolf greeting a more dominant animal slinks along the ground and sometimes rolls over on its back. 
The dominant wolf holds its tail high. 
To show affection, wolves lick each other's muzzles or wag their tails. 
When a wolf stares another wolf in the eye, it's a sign of aggression. 


The pack often leaves the pups in the care of a babysitter This "wolf's job is not just to play 
with and protect them, but to teach important lessons about being a wolf

life in the pack 
scientists often compare the wolf pack to a human family, because wolves live together and care for one another, 
just like humans. The wolf pack in my backyard has often seemed like family to me. 
This spring, when I realized that two of the pack's wolf pups had died, I felt the loss strongly.

Each year, around April or May, the alpha female usually bears one litter of four to six pups. 
Wolf pups weigh one pound at birth and are blind, deaf, and completely dependent on their mother. 
They
live in a hole or cave that the alpha pair finds or has dug in the ground. 
This first home is called a den. The pups stay in or near the den until they are about two months old and big enough to 
travel.
Then the adults take them to a new place. This larger, open area, known as a rendezvous site, 
gives the growing pups more room to explore and sleep. The pups are moved often, and the sites are usually 
located near food and water sources.
Wolf pups love to play; they stalk, pounce, wrestle, and chew on each other. 
This is good practice for when they are old enough to go along

The alpha pair always eats first, then the subordinates eat. 
The wolf with the least status, the omega wolf, eats last. 

on hunts with the pack. During play, the pups find out who is the most dominant. 
This is very important for the stability of the family.
Every adult in the wolf pack will help take care of the pups by bringing them food and playing with them. 
When most of the pack is out hunting, one adult- the babysitter- usually stays with the pups. 
Sometimes, if the pack is small, the adults may have to leave the pups alone while they hunt.
This leaves the pups vulnerable to other predators, such as bears.

The pack will also share in caring for elder or injured members of the pack. 
I've watched the pack near my home take care of a wolf I call Broken

Born with black fuzzy fur, pups nurse until they are about six weeks old. 
Much tenderness is shown between the alpha pair during courtship (Left).

An adult wolf (left) shows the alpha male it accepts its higher status by displaying submissive body language.
Wolves howl (right) at different pitches to create discord. 
The pack then appears much larger to other wolf packs in the area.

Foot. One of his front paws was clearly broken and never healed, most likely from a steel trap. 
For the last three years, he has hopped along on three legs.
Other wolves in his pack greet him and show him respect, 
letting him eat with the pack. Because of his broken foot, he cannot go on a hunt for large animals. 
But he can hunt small animals like mice by pouncing on them and pinning them.
Wolves are good at catching and killing large animals. 
They can run very fast, from 25 to 40 mph (40 to 65 kph) for short distances. 
Their powerful jaws and interlocking teeth help them to catch and

hang onto their prey. A wolf pack works together to hunt large prey such as deer, moose, caribou, musk, oxen, bison, and 
elk. A lone wolf will seek out smaller animals like beaver, rabbits, and rodents, which are easier to catch.
To be healthy, each wolf should have about 2 1/2 pounds of food a day, so wolves must hunt often to catch enough 
food for the pack. They tend to prey on the sick, weak, injured, old, or young. 
When hunting is poor, wolves can go for long periods without eating. 
Especially for pups, starvation is one of the main causes of death. 

Hungry Like A Wolf
As predators, wolves actually help deer and other herds stay healthy.
Wolfing food: Wolves tend to prey on animals that are weak. They are easiest to catch!
Wolf workout: The strong healthy animals are the ones that get away. They survive and reproduce.
Cry for the wolf: When wolves disappear from an area, deer and other animal populations get too 
numerous and soon suffer from hunger or disease.

hungry pups nip and nuzzle at an adult's mouth to stimulate regurgitation 

An arctic wolf jumps from one ice floe to another in search of scraps of food washed up from the sea.

In the early 1970, there were fewer than 1,000 gray and red wolves left in the lower 48 states.
To protect wolves from further decline, they were two of the first species given protection 
under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Since then, the wolf has made a remarkable recovery. 
How many wolves are there now in the world? Some estimates show more than 5,000 wolves in the lower 48 states, 
including 3,000 in Minnesota, and 6,000-7,000 in Alaska. Worldwide
A volunteer carries a sedated pup in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.
The pup, which came from Canada, would eventually be released into the park. making a comeback 

A wolf reintroduced to Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming chases after a herd of elk.

there are at least 150,000 in 57 different countries. 
Scientists have many ongoing studies of the wolves. 
The longest study of the wolf-and-prey relationship is at Isle Royale National Park on Lake Superior, 
where scientists have been observing wolves and their relationship with moose for 50 years. 

In 1995 and 1996 wild wolves from Canada were released, or reintroduced, in the northern Rocky Mountains of Yellowstone 
National Park and in Idaho. Yellowstone is now the best place to see and hear wild wolves. 
Local ranchers were opposed to the wolf reintroductions and threatened to shoot them to prevent 
them from attacking livestock. 
A group called Defenders of Wildlife worked out a compromise.
They established a fund to pay farmers and ranchers for livestock that the wolves killed. 
However, it's not always clear how the livestock died. Wolves often eat animals that have died from other causes.
America's wolves still need our help. Some people want to change the wolves' status. 
In Minnesota, wolf populations have recovered.

Here I am following wolf tracks and hoping to find a wolf pack in Minnesota's Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness. 

Wolves in this state are no longer on the endangered species list.
In Alaska, where wolves were never endangered, they are hunted from airplanes. 
And new laws in Montana and Idaho allow hunters to kill hundreds of wolves. 
Environmental groups are speaking out against this change. 
Why is there a rush to kill these wolves? 
One reason is that wolves are often blamed for the decline in populations of elk and other animals hunted for sport, 
even though these declines may be also caused by natural events, like drought, or even human hunters.

People's fear and misunderstanding of wolves is the biggest threat to their survival. 
I hope that this attitude will change, and the howl of the wolf will again be heard in places it used to call home.
Once highly endangered, wolves have made a remarkable recovery over the past 25 years. 
Here, a lone wolf howls to find his pack on Ellesmere Island, Canada.


Humans and wolves in North America have had a long, tangled relationship. 
Many Native American tribes respected and revered wolves. 
But European settlers had a different view. 
As settlers pushed west in the 1800, they came into conflict with wolves, who sometimes hunted their domestic animals.
The federal government began paying hunters a bounty- a sum of money-for every wolf they killed. 
Wolves were shot, poisoned, and trapped to the brink of extinction.
That view of wolves has changed. 
Wolves were added to the endangered species list in 1973, and since then, wolf populations have made a comeback.
But some hunters and ranchers continue to oppose wolf reintroductions and laws that protect wolves. 
They blame wolves for a decline in deer herds, even though the decline could be caused by other factors, 
including drought, disease, and overhunting by humans.
Other people think wolves are dangerous to humans, but healthy wild wolves have rarely

attacked humans in North America. Wolves are legally hunted in Alaska, and other states are trying to pass laws to 
allow hunting.
Here's how you can help:
Be a wolf ambassador.
Help to educate others about the important role wolves play in the ecosystem. 
Remind them that in modem times, there is not a single proven case of a wild, healthy wolf killing a person in the 
Learn about organizations like Defenders of Wildlife, the Wolf Conservation Center, and the International Wolf Center, 
which protect wild wolves.
You and your friends or family could "adopt" a wolf from Wolf Song of Alaska or Defenders of Wildlife. 
In return, you might get a certificate or a wolf toy. 
Plus, you'll feel good knowing that you are helping protect wolves.
Write to your representatives in Congress, especially if you live in a state that has wolves. 
Tell them that wild wolves are important to you and you want them protected.
Two young wolf pups  play tug-of-war with a piece of fur from an arctic fox. 
how you can help
it's your turn

Unless you live in the northern woods of Minnesota like Jim Brandenburg, 
you may have a hard time finding wolves in the wild. 
Here are some ideas for how you can enjoy wolves:

You might get a chance to see a wolf- or hear their haunting howls- 
if your family takes a trip to Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming. 
You could also see a wolf at a zoo or wildlife park. 
Some zoos keep wolves in family groups, where you can see them interact. 
How would the behavior of captive wolves be different from that of wild ones? How would it be the same?

There are many websites where you can listen to wolf howls. Try 
Pay attention to the body language of the family dog. 
Wild wolves are its ancestors! Just like wolves, dogs roll over on their backs to show submission to a 
dominant member of their pack, wave their tails in greeting, and bow down and slap the ground with their 
forelegs when they want to play. 
Curl up with a good book. You might enjoy Julie of the Wolves by Jean Craighead

George. This classic story is about a young girl who spends a season living with a family of arctic wolves. 
What typical wolf behaviors are described?
Never Cry Wolf is a movie about a wolf biologist who goes to the Arctic to solve the mystery of 
why caribou are dying. Based on a true story, it helped to dispel myths about wolves and to 
change people's attitudes towards them. 

as pups grow they become very curious about their SUrroundings.
An arctic wolf rests in a field of cotton after a long hunt; wolves sometimes sleep 12 hours straight.
facts at a glance

Scientific and Common Names 
The species name for the gray wolf is Canis Lupus. The gray wolf has five subspecies North America: 
the arctic wolf, the eastern timber wolf, the Rocky Mountain or Mackenzie Valley wolf, the Mexican wolf, and the 
Great plains wolf.  All canines (wolves, dogs, foxes, jackals, and coyotes) belong to a group of animals called 
Carnivora, which also includes bears, seals, and other predators.

Types of Wolves
There are two wolf species: gray and red. (Another animal, the Ethiopian wolf is considered a third, 
separate species of wolf by many scientists. However, others argue that it is just related to wolves, 
like a jackal or coyote is.) At least 150,000 gray wolves exist; 
they are not endangered. Red wolves, native to the southeastern United States, are critically endangered, 
with fewer than 150 animals.

Size
Gray wolves are the largest canines in the wild, standing

26--32 inches (66-81 cm) tall at the shoulder. On average, females weigh about 80 pounds (36 kg); 
males about 90 pounds (41 kg).

Lifespans
It's tough being a wolf. Young wolves die from starvation or are killed by predators like bears, coyotes, or other wolves.
Grown wolves can starve or suffer from diseases, be killed by hunters, be hit by cars, or be injured by the flying 
hooves of their prey. The average wild wolf lives six to eight years.
Captive wolves can live for twice as long.

Special Features
Wolves are intelligent and highly social creatures. 
They communicate through sound, scent marking, and body language. 
Within the pack, social status determines which wolves get such privileges as eating first or mating. 
Groups of wolves hunt cooperatively to capture prey.

Habitat and Range
Wolves used to live in northern
latitudes around the world.
They are adapted to many environments, including prairie, woods, desert, and arctic regions. 
Now they live mainly in remote wilderness areas in Canada, the northern United States, and parts of Europe and Asia.

Food
Wolves hunt a variety of prey, from huge caribou and moose to tiny field mice. 
Occasionally, they are scavengers, eating animals that are already dead.
Sometimes wolves kill cattle and sheep, leading to conflicts with humans. 
Wolves live in a perpetual cycle of feasting and famine. 
A wolf can gulp 20 pounds (9 kg) of meat at a sitting, or it can go two weeks without eating.

Reproduction
Wolves usually live in family groups consisting of an alpha pair of wolves who reproduce, and several other wolves 
who may be grown offspring from previous years or other relatives. 
Wolves mate between January and May, depending on where they live, and the pups are born after a 60-day gestation (pregnancy). 
Pups don't open their eyes until they are two weeks old. 
They usually come out of the den for the first time at three weeks of age. 
They join the pack on the hunt when they are about six months old.

Biggest Threats
Because wolves need large territories in order to find enough food, habitat loss is a serious

Before Europeans settled the gray wolves lived in most of the country (map ). By 1973, when they were listed as endangered, 
gray wolves were practically extinct in the living only in a limited area of northeastern Minnesota and Michigan's Isle Royale 
(map ). Today, gray wolf populations are recovering as a result of their protected status and their reintroduction to 
selected areas (Map ).

problem for them. So is illegal killing by human hunters and ranchers. Where the needs of wolves and humans conflict.
humans are the biggest threat that wolves have.

miles
kilometers
approximate gray wolf range
map  historic range united states
map  range map current range 