Freedom on the Menu the greensboro sit ins


Just about every week mama and I went shopping downtown. I loved having her all to myself for the afternoon. 
Whenever it was hot or we got tired we'd head over to the snack bar in the five and dime store. 
We would stand as we sipped our cokes because we weren't allowed to sit at the lunch counter. 

Once I watched a girl swivel a stool as she spooned a banana split. In the empty seat beside her was a purse almost exactly 
like mine. Can I have a banana split I begged mama. Not her Connie said mama. I'll fix you one at home. 
Won't be the same I grumbled. All over town signs told mama and me where we could and couldn't go. 
Signs on water fountains swimming pools movie theaters even bathrooms. 
we cater to white trade only
water white


Everybody I knew obeyed the signs except my great aunt Gertie from new york. Once when she visited us she drank from a 
whites only fountain and said real love I've heard of colored water. Have you connie? Then she lifted me up so I could take a 
sip. I looked up from the fountain know better than that a man scolded. I started to say sorry mister but aunt gertie 
just huffed I am too old for silly rules. It was  a real hot day but the man walked away without taking a drink. 
white colored

There weren't any signs up in the five and dime but we still knew how it was. 
Most people did not expect change anytime soon but my daddy thought different. 
Dr. king's is coming to town he told us one morning. Who's sick  I asked. He is not that kind of doctor connie daddy laughed. 

He's a minister who is working to make things better for us said daddy. So we can go anywhere we please said mama. 
Like the lunch counter I asked. said daddy and other places too. dr. king

Later that week our whole family went to hear doctor king preach at the college chapel. 
I didn't really understand all of his speech but I liked his booming voice. 
It sounded as if he believed God was on our side. Every few minutes mama said amen and when dr. king sat down everyone stood 
and clapped for a long time. 

Soon after that my brother and sister joined the national association for the advancement of colored people. 
Everyone called it the double they let me tag along as they went door to door helping people to sign up to vote. 
I've never voted in my life said a white haired lady leaning on a cane. Will I get to vote for the president? Yes I said. 
My brother wants to be president when he's all the way grown. Tell him he's got my vote she chuckled. 
And to hold on to those big dreams she said handing me her voter registration form. Yes I will tell him I promised thinking 
about my own dreams too. Times are changing she said waving as I left. 

Then one day mama and I went  shopping downtown. We stopped at the snack bar just like always. 
I tugged at mama's sleeve look over at the lunch counter! We know those boys! There sat four of brother's friends from college. 
Do they know they're in the wrong place? I whispered. Some rules have to be broken mama whispered back. 
I heard one of them order coffee and a doughnut please. I'm sorry we cannot serve your kind said the blond haired waitress 
wringing her hands. The boys didn't budge. don't understand english? A kitchen worker asked. Go on over to the snack bar she 
hissed. Stop making trouble here. The manager tapped his foot and jutted out his chin. 
they can sit there forever for all I care he said, storming out of the store. 

An old white lady came up to the boys. I'm  so proud of you she said clear as a bell so everyone could hear. 
I wished someone had done this sooner. The waitress kept wiping and re-wiping the counter and refilling salt and pepper 
shakers sugar pourers and napkin holders. 
Suddenly the manager came back with a tall policeman. Let's go connie said mama. The manager shooed us right out of the store 
and then put a closed sign in the window. I could not wait to tell brother. 

Why'd your friends do that? I asked. If we can spend money at a store said brother it is only fair that we should be able to 
eat at the store lunch counter. I guess so I said think it'll work. Sometimes it is important just to try said daddy 
rubbing his chin. The next day daddy showed me the newspaper. 
The headline said negro students stand up by sitting down. 
They sat four hours said daddy peering over the newspaper. 
I would be too hungry to wait that long I said. Connie they didn't really want food said daddy. 
They wanted to be allowed to get it same as if they were white. To be treated fairly. equal rights

By Friday we heard on the news how hundreds more had joined the sit in. 
The protests are growing I told daddy. I'm joining the sit ins brother said bursting into the room. 
And I'm going to picket downtown said sister tomorrow. I want to go to I said I am plenty big enough to hold a sign and I know 
I can sit. It's good that you want to help said daddy but connie you are still too young for these things. 
I never get to do anything important I pouted. You can help us make picket signs said sister that's very important. 

The next morning I handed sister my flag for her to carry. We will tell you everything when we get home brother promised. 

we shall not be moved

Turns out I saw the protests on TV. Hundreds of people walked up and down the sidewalks in front of stores restaurants and 
movie theaters. I saw my own sister carrying  a picket sign. And there was the back of brother's head at the lunch counter. 
My own brother! I'm just so proud of them said daddy. Me too I said. I just pray that there is no trouble mama fretted.  
After a while I watched the news on TV almost as much as mama and daddy. One night I saw a report on the sit in. 
that does not look like downtown I said. Connie the sit ins have spread all over the south said daddy. 

Just then the phone rang I answered it. Daddy it is sister she got arrested at the lunch counter she's in jail! 
Sister who always got in school who hardly ever got in trouble who was what mama called mule stubborn. 
Daddy raced to the police station but sister would not let him get her out of jail. He told me how the students kept 
chanting jail not bail jail not bail. We can't just leave sister here with the bad guys I pleaded. 
She's made up her mind connie said mama wiping a tear. She wants to stay with the other students. 
In a few days sister came home. Promise me you'll stop picketing I begged. I can't do that she said hugging me tight. 

Now instead of shopping downtown we had to order from the sears catalog. Mama and I leafed through the big thick catalog 
together and she even let me help pick things out but we both knew it was not the same. 
How long before the sit ins are over mama I asked. Till folks get what they want said mama. 
That summer mama daddy and I finally went downtown. When we passed Woolworth's I heard someone shout they're serving them. 
Daddy stopped so fast that the brakes screeched and mama and I jolted forward. 
We parked and ran to the counter. 

There sat the woman who worked in the restaurant kitchen. They were all dressed up fancy and eating egg salad. 

I can't even stand the smell of egg salad but I stood and watched them eat every bite. Looks pretty good I said. 
Daddy and I shared big grins. The next day brother sister and I made a special trip downtown. 

Brother wore a suit and tie. We girls wore hats and white gloves. At the lunch counter I climbed up on a stool next to them. 
We will have three hot dogs three French fries two coffees one coke and one banana split please I told the blond haired 
waitress. Sister and brother sipped coffee and I twisted on my stool while we waited for our meals. 
Our food soon arrived. As I ate the waitress plopped an extra cherry on a mound of whipped cream. 
She still looked nervous but she smiled at me. It was the best banana split I ever had.
author's note

on february four students  from north carolina agricultural and technical
college sat down at woolworth's 
lunch counter in greensboro north carolina and asked to be served the college freshmen seventeen and eighteen year olds
franklin mccain david richmond joseph mcneil and ezell blair now known as jibreel khazan became known as the greensboro
four

we were kids ourselves said joseph mcneil after living that lifestyle of second class everything we said enough is enough
we didn't like not having dignity and respect said franklin mccain i went out of the store feeling powerful 
within days students from bennett college a black all girls school began sitting at the lunch counter too white
students from other local schools woman's college greensboro college and guildford college also participated students not
only sat at lunch counters but made their own signs and marched on downtown sidewalks urging people not to shop at stores
whose lunch counters would not  allow blacks to sit down and eat
often white hecklers tried to scare off the protesters by calling them names and threatening violence some students
were arrested but the greensboro sit-ins lasted off and on
for seven months
high school students carried on the protests after the college students went home for summer break
student led sit-ins soon spread throughout the south

on july blacks were finally allowed to eat at the woolworth's lunch counter the first served were the lunch 
counter's black workers geneva tisdale anetha jones
susie morrison and charles best 
i am very proud of that said geneva tisdale who worked behind the counter for thirty five years we've come a long way

after the sit-ins students and other supporters successfully challenged segregation in other public places parks swimming pools 
beaches theaters restaurants
libraries courtrooms and elsewhere

since then sit-ins and other forms of civil disobedience have been used by activists around the world

environmentalists have hugged trees in forests to stop logging 
operations groups have pitched tent cities large encampments
in urban areas to protest poverty and homelessness
and international protesters have formed human
chains people standing hand in hand for miles to focus on social economic 
and political injustices like the student 
sit-ins of these peaceful forms of resistance send a strong message till justice
is done we shall not be moved

two of the greensboro four left to right joseph mcneil and franklin 
mccain are joined by billy smith and clarence henderson in a sit-in protest at the woolworth lunch counter
