
from seed to maple tree
following the life cycle


Tree Life Cycles


Like animals, trees and other plants have a life cycle. 
There are many kinds of trees. Let's look at the life cycle of a sugar maple 
tree. We will see how it changes over seasons and years.


Maple tree are deciduous. This means they lose their leaves each year



A Seed in Spring

Trees start out as seeds. Even the largest tree grows from a tiny seed. 
Sugar maple seeds lie on the ground at the end of winter. 
The days get longer. The snow melts. 
Then it is time for a seed to germinate or sprout 


Giant redwood trees can grow to be more than feet meters tall. Their trunks 
can be feet wide. But even they start out from very small seeds




A Seedling

A strong white root pushes out of the sugar maple seed and into the ground. 
A stem grows upward through the soil and into the air


The seed grows into a small plant. The young plant is called a seedling. 
Sunlight and water help the seedling grow strong


Sugar maple seedlings are a favorite food for white-tailed deer.




Growing Tall and Strong


Each year the seedling grows during spring and summer. 
The sun and warm temperatures during those two seasons help the tree grow. 
The tree grows about foot taller each year. 
Its trunk gets a little thicker


The seedling becomes a sapling when it reaches a height of more than feet.
Growth continues for about to years. 
Then the maple tree is an adult. 
Its growth slows down



Sugar maples can stand to feet to tall. They can live to years




Flowers Make Eggs


Male flower 
Female flower



An adult sugar maple tree grows flowers in spring. 
The flowers are greenish-yellow and droopy. 
Each flower can have both male and female parts. 
But it can also have just male or just female parts. 
The male parts make a yellow powder called pollen. 
The female parts make eggs



When a sugar maple tree is flowering the tree looks yellow




From Flowers to Fruit


Wind and insects help make new maple trees. 
A good wind can pick up the pollen and blow it onto another maple tree's flower. 
Bees and other insects can carry pollen too. 
The pollen lands on the female part of a flower. 
This process is called pollination



Bees help with pollination. A bee stops at a sugar maple flower to drink its 
liquid or nectar. Pollen on the flower sticks to the bee's feet. 
The bee flies to another flower. 
This time its feet leave the pollen behind




The Fruit


A pollinated sugar maple flower grows into a fruit. 
The hard fruit is called a double samara. It looks like a pair of seeds 
with small wings attached 

The fruit ripens in September or October. 
Then it falls from the tree. 
Usually the fruit carries one seed inside. 
The seed will be able to grow into a sugar maple tree


In fall it is good for seeds to be covered by leaves on the ground. 
The leaves hide the seeds from the squirrels birds and other seed-eating animals 




Flying Seeds

The winged shape of the double samara helps the fruit catch the wind. 
The fruit can blow far away from the parent tree

The parent tree uses lots of water and food from the soil. 
Because of this fact seeds grow better when they are not near their parent tree. 
Seeds also need to be cold and wet during winter. 
These conditions help them sprout during the next spring

Leaves get their green color from chlorophyll. During fall there is less 
sunlight for leaves to absorb so they start breaking down the chlorophyll 
for energy. Then the leaves change into bright colors. Soon the leaves will 
fall to the ground




Wintering


During winter the double samara lies on the ground. 
It does not break open. The seed does not start to grow. 
But inside the seed is still alive and preparing for spring


When spring arrives the sun shines for a longer amount of time each day. 
The ground thaws. Then the sugar maple seed sprouts. 
The life cycle of a sugar maple tree begins again


An adult maple tree is about to years old. Most sugar maples die from disease 
or insect damage. Some are chopped down 



Life cycle of a sugar maple tree

Seed 5-6 months 

Seedling 1-15 years

Sapling 16-30 years 

Adult maple 30-195 years




Fun Facts

Sugar maples in forests grow straight and tall. 
But sugar maples grown in the open branch out near the ground and spread out


When people carve initials or words in a tree it is like making a cut on your 
arm. Germs can enter the tree through the open cuts in the bark


Maple syrup comes from the sugar maple tree. 
People make syrup from the sap, or sugary water, 
that flows inside the tree each spring 


Many things in a tree's surroundings will affect its growth. 
The amount of sun and water the temperature and the quality of the soil are 
just a few things that will either speed up or slow down a tree's growth. 
Because these things will be different from year to year the length of time 
each tree spends in each stage of growth may also differ greatly 


Adult sugar maple tree
