here is the southwestern desert

here is the southwestern desert
Here is the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. 
Here is the southwestern desert. 

Here is the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. 
Here is the southwestern desert. Here is the lizard who is spied  by the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines 
that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 

here is the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines 
that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 


Here is the tree which shelters the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus
covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 

Here is the sun that blazes on the tree which shelters the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that 
perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 


here is the bobcat who basks in the sun that blazes the tree which shelters the roadrunner that chases the 
lizard who is spied by the hawk that 
perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 


Here is the badger that sniffs the bobcat who basks in the sun that blazes on the tree which shelters the roadrunner 
that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain 
for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 

Here is the squirrel unearthed by the badger that sniffs the bobcat who basks in the sun that blazes on the tree which 
shelters the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines that 
can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 

Here is the coyote that pounces on the squirrel unearthed by the badger that sniffs the bobcat who basks in the sun that 
blazes on the tree which shelters the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus 
covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 

Here is the snake that hisses at the coyote that pounces on the squirrel unearthed by the badger that sniffs the bobcat who 
basks in the sun that blazes on the tree which shelters the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that 
perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert.

Here is the hare who hears the snake that hisses at the coyote that pounces on the squirrel unearthed by the badger that 
sniffs the bobcat who basks in the sun that blazes on the tree which shelters the roadrunner that chases the lizard who is 
spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for a very long time. 
Here is the southwestern desert. 

Here is the cactus that is food for the hare who hears the snake that hisses at the coyote that pounces on the squirrel 
unearthed by the badger that sniffs the bobcat who basks in the sun that blazes on the tree which shelters the roadrunner 
that chases the lizard who is spied by the hawk that perches on the cactus covered with spines that can live without rain for 
a very long time. Here is the southwestern desert. 

wildlife of the sonoran desert
collared peccary also known as javelina
greater roadrunner
gopher snake
ringtail
desert tortoise
coyote
kit fox
red tailed hawk
round tailed ground squirrel
bobcat
badger
chuckwalla
cactus wren
black tailed jackrabbit
although black tailed jackrabbit is the proper name of this species it is not really a rabbit
but a hare rabbits are born furless and blind while hares are born with fur and a well developed sense of sight

collared lizard

There are four different deserts in North America: The great basin the mohave the sonoran and the Chihuahuan. 
the animals and plants shown in this book live in the Sonoran desert which is located in parts of arizona, california and 
mexico. there are more animal and plant species living in the Sonoran Desert than in any other desert in North America. 
There are many other deserts in the world. some famous ones are the sahara and Kalahari deserts of Africa the 
Great Sandy Desert of Australia and the Gobi Desert of Asia. 

Deserts are known for their clear skies high temperatures and lack of rain. usually less than 10 inches a year. 
animals use a variety of strategies to survive the desert dry conditions. 
some desert animals go through their whole lives without drinking a drop of water. 
instead they get water from seeds fruits insects or animal prey. 
coyotes often dig in the gravel near dry streambeds to find underground water sources which can then benefit other animals. 
for most creatures even the early morning dew provides relief. cactus plants survive the desert dryness because their 
stems are able to store water. after heavy rain the cactus stem swells with water during dry periods the cactus shrinks and 
shrivels. there are approximately 2000 species of cacti. the cactus at the beginning of the book is a saguaro and the one at 
the end is a prickly pear. the desert faces many threats such as the expansion of cities ranching and mining. 
we must act now to ensure their survival. too find out what you can do write to the superstition area land trust, box
apache junction or visit their website at.  





 