how a plant grows


What are plants 

Plants are living things. They are the only living things that can make their 
own food. Plants cannot move from place to place as animals can.
They stay in the same spot their whole life. Plants live in soil, sand, snow, 
and rock. Some even grow on top of other plants!

Trees shrubs and ferns are plants Some plants grow in water Most plants have roots,
 leaves, flowers, and a stem. Many grow from seeds. This book looks at how these 
plants grow.
Many plants have colorful flowers
Fruit contains the seeds of a plant
Plants can grow almost anywhere

Parts of a plant

Green plants have three parts: a stem, roots, and leaves. Each part of the plant 
has important

jobs to do.

the stem holds up the leaves and flowers it carries water and minerals from the
roots to the leaves  food made in the leaves travels down the stem to the roots

Roots hold the plant in place. They absorb water and minerals from the soil for 
the plant to use, Plants need minerals to grow, Roots also store extra food.
Leaves catch sunlight and use it to make food for the plant. The plant's wastes 
are also stored in its leaves. When leaves fall off, they take the waste with 
them.


Some vegetables, such as carrots, radishes, and beets, are roots.
They store food for the plant to use over the winter. They also give the plant 
energy to grow a new stem and leaves in the spring.

Not all leaves are wide and flat The needles on cactus plants and evergreen trees 
are thin waxy leaves 



The life of a seed plant 
These pictures show how a bean plant
 grows from a seed Some plants, such as beans, take less than one year to go 
through these stages, or life cycle, before they die.  They are called annuals.

Biennials, such as

carrots, take

Two years to  finish  their life cycle



Perennials such as trees bushes and many flowers live for at least three years



The seed breaks open A root grows down into the soil and the stem goes upward 



The small young plant or seedling grows leaves and can make its own food 



When the plant is fully grown it makes flowers insects or birds visit the 
flowers 

4. They bring parts of other flowers with them. The plant can now 
make seeds.

5. The flower dies and seeds grow inside it.
A fruit forms around the seeds.

6. The seeds fall from the plant so they have room to grow. They become new 
plants.


Coming to life Inside each seed is a tiny plant waiting to grow, or germinate.
Seeds will not sprout if they do not have enough heat and Water. Some seeds 
can wait for one hundred years before they sprout!

This part is called the seed leaf. It stores food for the seedling to use as 
it grows. Seed leaves do not look like the plant's true leaves.

This tiny shoot will become the stem of the plant.


This part will become the root.

The seed coat is a shell that protects the seed.
When a seed germinates, a tiny root breaks through the seed coat and pushes 
down into the soil. Then a tiny shoot grows upward. After the shoot pushes up 
through the soil, the seed leaves shrivel. The seedling has used up all the 
food stored inside. As the seed leaves disappear, the plant's true leaves appear.


Making food

When a seedling grows true leaves, it begins making its own food. Making food is
 called photosynthesis.

Not all plants are able to make their own food. Only plants with chlorophyll in 
their leaves can make food.
Chlorophyll gives leaves their green color. It uses the sun's energy to turn air
 and water into a sugar called glucose.
The plant uses glucose as food.

The leaves of some trees change color in the autumn. They change because there is
 not enough light, and the chlorophyll that makes them green is destroyed. The 
leaves can no longer make food. The tree uses stored food through autumn and
 winter.


Flowers bloom

More than half of all plants have flowers. Most flowers are brightly colored 
and have a scent. Some are small, green, and have no smell. Trees and grasses 
have small flowers that have no scent.

Flowers have different looks and smells, but they all do the same job. They 
help with pollination and making seeds.
Pollination happens when the pollen from one plant reaches another plant of 
the same

kind. After pollination takes place, seeds can be made.
Flowers with brightly colored petals attract birds and insects.

Stamens are around the pistil in the middle of the flower.
Stamens are covered with dusty powder called pollen.

The sticky top of the pistil is called the stigma. When pollen from another 
flower gets stuck on its stigma, a flower is pollinated.
stigma
pistil

Flower visitors

Most flowers need pollinators to move their pollen to other plants. Pollinators 
are visitors such as bees, birds, and bugs.
They visit colorful flowers that have strong scents. Many of these flowers have 
nectar inside. Nectar is a sweet liquid that some pollinators like to drink.

While drinking nectar, the pollinators get covered with pollen grains. When they 
visit another plant, the pollen brushes off onto its flower. The flower is 
pollinated, and seeds can be made.

Some plants, such as trees and grasses, use the wind to move their pollen. Their 
flowers are not large or colorful because they do not
need to attract pollinators.


The ovary will become a fruit.

The ovules become seeds.

Making seeds

After a flower is pollinated, seeds begin to grow inside it. Its petals fall off. 
The ovary inside the flower grows larger and becomes a fruit. A fruit is the part
 of the plant that has seeds inside.

The petals fall off.

The ovary grows larger.

These apple blossoms have been pollinated.
There are many different types of fruits.
Some, such as pea pods and watermelon, have many seeds inside. Others, such as 
cherries and plums, have only one seed.

Some fruits are soft and juicy. Peaches, raspberries, and tomatoes are examples
 of these fruits. Other fruits, such as those around peanuts and sunflower seeds,
 are thin, dry, and hard.

The ovary finally becomes an apple, and the ovules have become the seeds.

The ovary gets bigger as the seeds grow inside.


Seeds on the move

once seeds are made, they need places to grow. Animals, wind, and water help 
move the seeds of plants.

Many seeds are inside colorful, tasty fruit. When an animal eats the fruit, it 
also eats the seeds. Later, the seeds are scattered in the animal's droppings.

Seeds can also be carried by wind or water. Maple seeds, for example, have 
wings and fly like small helicopters.
Dandelion seeds have parachutes to float away on a breeze. Some seeds, such as 
coconuts, float on water and sail to their new homes.



A few plants can scatter seeds without help. Some make their seeds inside fruits 
that burst open and spray the seeds all around others have fruits that are like
 rattles their seeds spill out when the fruits are shaken Some seeds are covered 
in tiny hooks that catch on animal fur. An animal carries the seed with it until 
the hooks break. The seeds then drop onto their home and become new plants.

Other ways plants start

not all plants begin as seeds some grow from bulbs others such as ferns and mosses
grow from tiny specks called spores

plants that do grow seeds can make new plants in other ways some such as trees and
rose bushes send up small shoots or suckers from their roots the suckers become 
new plants other trees begin as roots the tropical tree below is sending down new
roots from its branches when the roots reach the ground they become new trunks that 
grow into trees. these trees look more like a forest than a single tree

Some trees grow roots from their branches Some plants grow from bulbs.

Some plants start as suckers.

Some plants grow from spores.


Meat eaters

some plants are carnivorous They eat meat. They do make some of their own food, 
but they cannot get enough nutrients from the swampy soil where they live. They
 get more

nutrients by eating insects.

The Venus flytrap has leaves with long bristles. When an insect touches these 
bristles, the leaf snaps shut around it!
A pitcher plant has leaves that are like slippery jugs filled with juice. Insects 
slip down the side of a leaf and drown in the liquid at the bottom. Hairs that
 point downwards stop the insect from crawling out. The plant's juices then turn
 the insect to liquid, which the plant uses as food.

why plants are important
People and other creatures cannot live without plants. Plants take energy from the
 sun 

use it to turn water and air into

food. The energy is passed on to other creatures when they eat the plant's root,
 leaves, stem, or fruit.

Some creatures do not eat plants, but they eat the animals that feed on plants.
 The food energy that started with a plant gets passed along the food chain and
 keeps other creatures alive.

People use plants for food, but they also need them for other things.
Medicine, clothes, and furniture are made from plants.
Other creatures need plants, too. Fields and forests are home to many types of 
animals. The plants give animals shelter from the weather and help them hide 
from enemies. Plants also make the air fresher. They produce oxygen, a gas that 
humans and animals need to breathe.
Try these activities

Grow a bean plant!

you will need:

a glass
paper towels water
a few dried beans a plastic container such as an ice cream tub

potting soil

Soak dried beans in water overnight.

Scrunch up paper towels and stuff them into a glass.
Add enough water to soak the paper towels. Place the beans between the glass
 and the paper towels.
Space the beans at least 1 inch (2.5 cm) apart.
Put the jar in a warm, dark place such as a cupboard. Make sure the paper 
towels stay damp. Watch for a tiny root to sprout after a few days.
6. Soon after the root sprouts, a small stem will grow up towards the top of

the glass.
7. When your seedling is about 2 inches tall, you can plant it in soil

placed in the container.
8. In about ten days, the stem of

the plant will have grown  its true

leaves. Now your plant is making

its own food!  beans
Watch a plant drink!

You will need:

a white carnation with a long, thick stem (get one from a flower shop) 2 small, 
clear bottles or narrow glasses water red food coloring blue food coloring a 
paring knife an adult to help you use the knife

1. Fill the bottles or glasses with water.
2. Add a few drops of red food coloring to one bottle and drops of blue to the 
other.
3. With an adult's help, cut the stem starting from the bottom, until the flower
 will stand up in the bottles.
4. Put half the stem in the bottle with red coloring and the other half in the
 bottle with blue.
5. Leave your flower and bottles in a sunny spot for a few hours and then check 
them. What did you find?
Make an indoor garden!

You will need:
3 or 4 small house plants that need the same amount of light and water plants 
that grow in warm, wet environment are the easiest to use a glass container 
such as a small aquarium or a large jar with a big opening potting soil gravel 
a spoon spray bottle 1. Cover the bottom of a container with a layer of gravel.
2. Put a layer of soil on top of the gravel.
Make sure that the soil is deep enough to allow the plant roots to grow.

3. Wet the soil.

4. With the spoon, dig out holes and place the plants in them.
5. Cover the roots with soil and place your container in a well-lit place.
6. With a spray bottle, keep the plants and soil moist, but not wet. Watch 
them grow.
