How do birds find their way

We can watch birds fly from tree to tree, from tree to house, then back again. They seem to fly here, and there, and anywhere.
Blackpoll Warbler   Northern Oriole

If we watch birds all year, we find that some seem to disappear in fall, when the days get shorter and colder. They are flying south, where it is warmer. 
snow geese

Early in spring the first birds begin to come back. Every spring birds return north to make their nests, lay eggs, and hatch their babies. We say the birds are "migrating". They are
moving from their winter homes in the south to their summer homes in the north.
northern orioles  arctic tern

Once they reach their northern homes, they will build their nests. They may build nests in trees or shrubs, or on porch ledges. Or, like the woodpeckers, they may bore holes down 
into trees and make their cozy nests inside. Some go to the same nesting area or even the exact same nest that they used the summer before.
barn swallows   yellow-bellied sapsucker

Long ago people did not know that some birds migrate. They thought the birds hid in holes in the ground and slept all winter. Some people guessed that birds spent the winter in the 
mud on the bottoms of ponds.
air  ice  mud

Now we know where these birds go. When birds start to migrate, ornithologists- scientists who study birds- use traps and nets to catch a few of them. They put bands on their legs 
and then let the birds go. The bands do not hurt the birds. Each band has a code on it that tells where and when the bird was banded. 

Some birds migrate for weeks because they stop along the way. Other birds fly for only a few days. Some birds fly thousands of miles when they migrate. We know that orioles fly south
to Panama. And barn swallows fly to Central and South America.
summer homes  winter homes  northern oriole barn swallow

Hummingbirds weigh only as much as a penny, yet they fly over water for 500 miles, without stopping, when they migrate. Arctic terns fly more than 10,000 miles- all the way from
northern Maine to the south pole. But how do the birds know where to go? and how do they find their way? that's the big mystery.
rudy-throated hummingbird  arctic tern

Some birds may follow rivers, mountain ranges, or seashores. But many birds find their way over the ocean. There seems to be nothing there to guide them. What keeps the birds from
flying in circles?
barn swallow  arctic tern

Ornithologists have some ideas about how birds know which way is north or south. Birds migrate both in the daytime and at night. When birds fly by day, they use the sun to guide 
them. Birds seem to know what time of day it is and can use the sun's position to find north and south. They know that to fly south in the morning when the sun is in the east, they
must have the sun on the left. For birds to fly south in the afternoon, the sun must be on the right.
sunrise noon sunset

When birds fly at night, the stars help them to find their way. Scientists have tested this idea. Birds were put in a big planetarium where the position of the stars could be moved.
Scientists who worked in the planetarium placed the stars in the sky as we see them. The birds flew in one direction. When the pattern of the stars was changed, the birds flew in
a different direction. It was clear that the birds had noticed that the position of the stars had changed.
Blackpoll warbler

But birds can also find their way when it is cloudy. They fly when they cannot see the sun during the day or the stars at night. How do they know which way to go?
blackpoll warbler

One idea is that birds are able to use the earth's magnetic field to guide them. The magnetic field is an invisible force that surrounds the earth. It is strongest near the North 
and South Poles. The magnetic field is what makes the needle on a compass point north. Ornithologists think that some birds may have built-in "compasses" in their bodies. 
North magnetic pole    south magnetic pole

Homing pigeons are especially good at finding their way. When they are taken far away from home, they are usually able to find their way back. Scientists have experimented with
these pigeons. They put special covers over the birds' eyes so that the pigeons cannot see clearly. Even when the pigeons cannot see, they are often able to return home.
Homing Pigeon

Another kind of bird, called a Manx shearwater, was carried from England to Massachusetts, a distance of about 3,000 miles. In twelve days it was back in England in its own nest.
Manx Shearwater

How do birds know when it's time to leave for the south? Or, at the end of winter, how do they know it is time to start north?
Northern orioles

Scientists know that birds have a built-in yearly "calendar". This calendar tells the birds that when the days become shorter, it is fall. It is time to migrate south. When the days
become longer, it is spring and time to migrate north.

When fall approaches, birds eat a lot of food to store energy for their flight. All at once they are gone. They have started to migrate.
barn swallows yellow-bellied sapsucker northern oriole

Several months later, the birds are getting ready to migrate again. They must make their long journey to the north. It is time to build nests, lay eggs, and raise babies.
ruby-throated hummingbird northern oriole (female) northern oriole (male) barn swallow

How high do birds fly?
jet planes small planes swifts and swallows songbirds ducks and geese eagles, vultures, and hawks seabirds and shorebirds bar-headed geese
6 miles 5 miles 4 miles 3 miles 2 miles 1 mile sea level
35,000 feet 30,000 feet 25,000 feet, 20,000 feet, 15,000 feet, 10,000 feet, 5,000 feet, 1,000 feet

We have solved some of the mysteries of bird migration. We know where birds go. We also know how high and fast they fly. Some birds fly as high as five miles above earth. But most
birds fly about a half mile above the ground. Some fly very fast- over 50 miles an hour- when the wind is blowing in the same direction that they are flying. 
blackpoll warbler  arctic tern

even though people have watched birds for thousands of years, we still do not have all the answers about bird migration. But ornithologists keep trying- maybe you will be one of them. 























