the iroquois the six nations confederacy 





Mohawk men traditionally decorated themselves with beads, jewelry, and body paint. 
The Mohawk are members of the Iroquois Confederacy. chapter Who are the Iroquois? For more than
 1,000 years, the Iroquois nations have lived in the northeastern part of the United States 
and in southern Canada. The word Iroquois often refers to a group of languages. But in this 
book, the word refers to some of the Iroquois-speaking people. These nations are sometimes 
called the Iroquois Confederacy of the Six Nations of the Iroquois. The lands of the Iroquois
 once stretched from the Hudson river in the east to lake erie in the west. The Iroquois lived
 as far north as Ontario Canada and as far south as Tennessee. When the Iroquois first came to
 present day new york, they found clear lakes, deep forests, and plenty of wildlife. The people
 fished in the rivers and lakes. In the forest they cut down trees to build shelters. Iroquois
 hunted deer and wild birds for food. They also gathered wild berries and nuts. They planted 
corn beans squash and other vegetables to add to their food supplies. Between the years 100 
and 1500, the Iroquois confederacy united the Mohawk oneida Onondaga Cayuga and Seneca nations.
 In 1722 the Tuscarora nation joined the confederacy. These six nations formed a peaceful 
alliance, which was a group of cooperating nations. When non-iroquois people arrived in Iroquois 
lands they recognized and respected the confederacy. Traders did business with the Iroquois the
 same way they did with any other independent nation. In the late 1700 the Iroquois confederacy 
impressed the early leaders of the united states. Thomas Jefferson used ideas from the confederacy
 as the basis for writing parts of the united states constitution. The Iroquois lived in 
traditional villages such as this one in new york. These tepeelike buildings were bark
 covered Mohawk huts. A proud people. In the early 1600, French traders began to explore 
Canada. They met the Algonquin people, who called their nearby enemies Iroquois. This word 
means snakes. The name the Iroquois called themselves is haudenosaunee. This word means people
 of the longhouse. The longhouse was a large house in which many related families lived. The 
Iroquois people built and lived in the longhouse. Today about 45,000 iroquois live on reservations 
in new york wisconsin  and Oklahoma. The government sets aside areas of land called 
reservations for American Indians to use. About 37,000 Iroquois live in areas in Canada called 
reserves. These reserves are located in Ontario and quebec. Many Iroquois also live in Canadian 
cities and in new york and other states. Today, the Iroquois act as an independent nation. They 
consider their confederacy to be equal to the governments of Canada and the united states. Many 
Iroquois are college professors artists lawyers steelworkers students and politicians. The Iroquois
 care for their lands in the same way their ancestors have for thousands of years. They work to
 preserve their own homelands and land throughout the united states and Canada. The people of
 the longhouse have survived. Legend. Original Iroquois confederacy, united states Canada, city. 
iroquois lands
ontario
quebec
canada
lake huron
montreal
st. lawrence river
brantford
lake ontario
mohawk
oneida
onondaga
cayuga
seneca
new york
new york city
lake erie
united states



In the mid 1700 Iroquois men made their way through the woodlands of new york. The earliest 
Iroquois moved into this area about 1,000 years ago. chapter Traditional life. The earliest Iroquois 
moved into the area of present day new york about 1,000 years ago. They settled near the south
 shore of lake Ontario and along the mohawk river.
the flat land along the shore of lake Ontario was good for farming. Elm trees 
provided wood for homes and cooking fires. The people used maple syrup from trees to sweeten 
their foods. The men hunted deer rabbits wild turkeys and other animals. They fished for trout
 salmon and bass in the rivers and lakes. 

The Iroquois built their villages on high ground with
 tall log fences called palisades. The palisades protected the people and their villages from 
wind wild animals and enemy attacks. After living in one village for or years, the 
Iroquois looked for a new village location. They looked for a place with good hunting and fresh 
soil for crops. Once the men had cleared the land, the Iroquois moved, built homes and planted 
fields. Large related family groups called cleans lived in longhouses. Each clan was related to
 a central woman called a clan mother. Women owned everything in the clan. Families in the 
longhouse helped each other. Older family members cared for children while the other adults worked.
 The women and girls worked together to cook meals. The longhouse. Men and women shared the work 
of building a longhouse. The men cut poles made from young trees. They pushed the poles into the 
ground then bent and tied them together at the top to create a frame. Women peeled pieces of bark
 from elm trees. They flattened the pieces to use as shingles to cover the frame. More poles held 
the shingles in place. A longhouse had no windows but the Iroquois cut holes in the roof so smoke
 could escape from indoor fire pits. A longhouse had plenty of space for a clan. There was a wide
 aisle down the center. Each family occupied a room that opened onto the aisle. About every 
 feet meters two families shared a fire pit. Families stored food clothing and bedding on a 
three level platform along the wall. The platform also provided a place to sleep off the bare
 ground. 

Many related families lived together in Iroquois longhouses. 

The size of each longhouse 
depended on the clan's size. The houses were about feet wide meters. They ranged in length from 
about feet to about feet meters. When the clan needed space for a new family
 they added room at one end of the longhouse. Growing food. Young boys and girls worked with 
their mothers. They gathered and prepared food and tended fields. In the spring, children 
gathered wild strawberries milkweed wild cabbage and other wild plants. 
In spring when the 
weather grew warmer families planted corn beans squash and other vegetables in their fields. 
 The Iroquois often planted corn beans and squash together in one field. The cornstalks provided 
a pole for the beans to climb. The large squash leaves shaded the ground around the plants and 
kept weeds from growing. These crops provided most of the food that the Iroquois ate. Corn was
 the most important crop. The Iroquois ate fresh corn in late summer. They dried the corn and 
ground it into corn flour. They used the flour to make corn bread and cakes and to thicken soups.

strawberry juice
in early spring iroquois indians celebrated the maple sap ceremony at this time the maple
sap began to rise in the trees the iroquois thanked the creator for giving them the sweet sap
in june strawberries began to ripen the iroquois held their yearly strawberry ceremony giving thanks
to the creator for strawberries the iroquois recipe below combines the traditional ingredients of
strawberries and maple syrup to make a sweet drink

ingredients cups sliced strawberries fresh or frozen
cups water
cup pure maple syrup
equipment
dry ingredient measuring cups
liquid measuring cup
blender or food processor
serving glasses
what you do
measure and place all ingredients in a blender or food processor 
blend until ingredients are smooth
carefully pour juice into glasses and serve
makes about servings



 Roles of men and women. Girls and their mothers worked closely together. The girl learned to 
weave baskets and make clay pots. They  learned the best places to find wild foods and many ways
 to cook the foods. Mothers taught their daughters the best time to plant crops and how to harvest
 them in the fall. Girls helped their mothers use deerskin hides to make clothing and moccasins. 
Men performed many jobs for the village. They cleared fields for crops built longhouses and made
 tools. Men were often gone for a month or more on hunting fishing or trading trips. They hunted 
deer moose elk and bear for food. They trapped squirrels raccoons and rabbits. To hunt they 
traveled long distances on food and often stayed in the forest near the hunting grounds. Boys 
had to learn many skills. They learned  to make bows and arrows traps for small animals and birds
 and fishing lines and hooks. They searched for the best hunting and fishing spots. Boys learned 
to trade with other nations and with Europeans. They played ball games with other boys to build 
teamwork. These skills helped them when they hunted and protected their villages as adults. 
iroquois women created traditional beadwork designs on clothing women held an important place 
in iroquois society
Women
 often arranged marriages. When a young man was ready to marry his mother sometimes suggested a
bride. If the young man agreed his mother talked to the young woman's clan mother. The clan mother
 studied the young couple's age and clan relationship. this connection was important because two 
people from the same clan were considered to be related and could not marry each other. If the
 young man was strong and a skillful hunter the clan mother usually approved the marriage. If
 the clan mother said no the couple could still marry but usually did not. after a couple married
they went to live with the bride's family. Their children became 
members of the mother's clan. 

Beliefs and ceremonies. The Iroquois believed that a creator made 
all people to care for the earth and its creatures. The people often thanked the creator for 
their food. The Iroquois believed that all things in the world had a spirit. Some spirits 
helped people and some harmed them through bad harvests and sickness. The Iroquois performed 
ceremonies according to their beliefs. There were ceremonies for each season. Almost every 
month the people performed ceremonies for successful hunting fishing and harvests. The Iroquois
 always began and ended their ceremonies with a specific prayer of thanksgiving. The ceremonies 
were special times of feasts dancing and singing. One of the most important observances were the
 midwinter ceremony. It usually took place in late January or early February when the hunters 
returned from the fall hunt. The men prepared for the winter hunt by repairing their weapons 
and snowshoes. At the beginning of the ceremony special messengers wearing masks came to each 
longhouse and stirred the cold ashes in the fire pits. The stirring represented the renewing of
 the seasons and of life. During the next week the people participated in different activities. 
Every evening they ate big means and danced together.  During the midwinter ceremony the clan 
mother gave new babies traditional clan names. Each clan mother knew the traditional names for 
her clan. When a clan member died the name went back to the clan mother until she gave it to a 
new baby. No two living members of a clan had the same name. ceremonies were happy times that 
brought families and villagers together. The dancing and games especially united the iroquois in
the middle of winter the ceremonies honored the 
creator who had been good to them. 

the iroquois believe the sky woman fell from the sky. geese helped her land safely on a giant turtle's back
animals helped sky woman create the earth.

the great law of peace
before europeans arrived in the iroquois lands the iroquois nations often fought each other. many iroquois died 
during these wars. the iroquois called these years the dark times. in the or a huron indian man called the 
peacemaker  came to the iroquois. he believed that the iroquois nations needed to work together to prevent 
wars women were the first people to accept the message so they became leaders in their communities. later the
mohawk oneida onondaga cayuga and seneca nations accepted peace and joined in a confederacy. chiefs gathered at
great councils to discuss problems affecting the nations of the confederacy the chiefs sometimes discussed 
a single problem for days. every chief had to agree on a solution. the great law of peace guides the iroquois
nations today. chiefs continue to gather at great councils on the reservations. they continue to solve problems
in these traditional ways



the iroquois traded beaver furs and deerskins for tools guns and other things they wanted from european traders
chapter

Europeans bring change. In the late 1500 French traders 
began to build trading posts along the st Lawrence river in Canada. At the time beaver hats were
 popular in Europe. Beaver fur was used to make the hats. French traders wanted beaver furs 
to sell to hatmakers. The Iroquois hunted and trapped as many beavers as  they could find. 
They traded the furs for tools such as metal knives axes hoes cooking pots and needles. 
These tools made the work of the Iroquois easier. Many other American Indians also trapped
 beavers to trade with the French. With so many people trapping the Iroquois had to search
 beyond their land for furs. The Iroquois began to trade with Indian nations to the north 
and west for more furs. They could then trade these furs to the French. Trade and disease. Europeans 
continued to arrive in north America. About 1600 Dutch traders established a trading post on 
the Hudson river. The Iroquois traded with them for glass bottles pottery and colored glass 
beads. The Dutch traded small shell beads to make wampum. The Iroquois soon used Dutch beads 
in place of the larger beads that they had made and used. About 1630 smallpox measles and other 
diseases spread from Europeans to the Iroquois. The Iroquois had never before suffered from 
these diseases and did not know how to cure them. Their bodies had no resistance to these 
diseases. Smallpox and measles spread quickly and often made everyone in a village sick. 
The diseases often killed the people in an entire village. About half of all the Iroquois 
in the confederacy died of diseases that Europeans spread. Many older Iroquois also died 
leaving young adults without the wisdom and skills of their older relatives. 
The Iroquois 
and their neighbors. From the mid 2600 to mid 1700 the Iroquois often fought with other 
groups of people. The Iroquois forced their way into other nations’ hunting grounds. They 
took prisoners during fights. The prisoners became new members of the Iroquois villages. 
French and British settlers sometimes fought the Iroquois over lands and trade routes. 
In the early 1700 the Tuscarora nation fought the Tuscarora war with European settlers.
 The Tuscarora had lived in south Carolina and Virginia for hundreds of years. They lost 
the wars and moved north to escape British attacks. They settled in new york. In 1722 the 
Iroquois confederacy accepted the tuscarora as the sixth confederacy nation. The French 
and British fought each other for control of the fur trade and for political control. 
The Iroquois tried not to take sides. They wanted to trade with both the French and the 
British. The Iroquois sometimes fought with Europeans to protect their land and trading routes.
 

When the American revolutionary war began the Iroquois called a great council. The council 
decided not to fight for either the british or the americans who wanted their independence. 
But confederacy rules allowed individuals to fight if they wished. Many Iroquois ignored the
 council's decision and fought alongside the british or americans. Relations with the united
 states. In 1779 the americans punished the Iroquois for siding with the british although 
individual Iroquois fought for the americans. American soldiers burned nearly all Iroquois 
villages and fields in western new york. Many Iroquois fled to Canada for british protection. 
 A Mohawk chief named joseph brant led raids against the americans in new york and Pennsylvania.
 Brant had strong ties to the british through his sister. She had married a british man who was
 in charge of northeastern indian affairs. After the revolutionary war ended brant asked Britain
 to give his people land in Canada. The british gave the Iroquois land near present day 
Brantford Ontario Canada. Some Onondaga cayuga Seneca and Tuscarora followed brant to Canada.
 Many Iroquois still live on this land called the six nations reserve. 

The Iroquois who 
stayed in the united states did not do as well as brant's people. In 1874 the Iroquois signed 
the treaty of fort stanwix. This agreement gave away much Iroquois land to the new
 government. Many Iroquois moved to reservations in new york. The reservations were too small
 to support the Iroquois by hunting or farming. The Iroquois confederacy lost its military power
 although the confederacy itself remained. In 18030 the congress passed the Indian
 removal act. This law allowed the government to exchange land west of the Mississippi river for
 American Indian lands in the eastern united states. After a series of treaties some Seneca 
and Cayuga moved west to a reservation in Oklahoma. For years the government 
and Iroquois had conflicts over Iroquois lands. Many Iroquois went to court to keep their 
new york lands. In the process they lost more land and had to live on reservations. By 1900
 the Iroquois lived on reservations in new york Wisconsin and Oklahoma and quebec and ontario
 Canada. 
some iroquois leaders signed the treaty of fort stanwix the treaty gave iroquois land to the government
mohawk chief joseph brant fought for the british during the revolutionary war 

wampum
wampum are beads made from quahog clams found along the east coast of north america these round clams have
hard shells they were used to make beads of white purple and a mixture of the two colors. a wampum carver cut
small pieces from the clamshell and used a grindstone to shape them into beads. the carver then used a small hand 
drill to make a hole in the beads. iroquois strung the beads into patterns on belts. wampum belts had
many uses. they were forms of agreements the iroquois traded the belts to chiefs or europeans to symbolize 
that the iroquois words were honest. an iroquois chief might send a wampum belt to other chiefs to request a 
meeting the patterns in the belts told about treaties nations and wars
in the the iroquois approached museums and private citizens who had acquired wampum belts. the iroquois wanted these
institutions and people to return the belts to the iroquois in the new york state museum returned wampum belts to
the new york onondaga nation. in the national museum of the american indian returned belts to the onondaga at 
the canadian six nations reserve many museums and private citizens still have belts that the iroquois would like
returned to them. 

handsome lake
in a seneca chief named handsome lake was sick from alcoholism. people who have this disease drink too much alcohol
one day, handsome lake fell into an unconscious state called a coma. in his coma he dreamed that the creator told
him that he must give up alcohol or die. when handsome lake woke he began to preach against war, drinking too much
alcohol and other evils handsome lake had other dreams. these dreams told him to bring back traditional ceremonies
such as the strawberry ceremony and the midwinter ceremony. he wanted his people to return to using the prayer of
thanksgiving to thank the creator for a good life. 
handsome lake's idea was called the good message or the new religion. handsome lake's message spread gradually 
among all the iroquois nations. it reminded them of their history and traditions. the good message positively affected
the lives of the iroquois. handsome lake convinced men that farming was not just women's work he advised people to
stop selling their land to citizens to survive the iroquois had to blend their traditions with a new way of life



mohawk steelworkers have become known for their skill at working on tall buildings. chapter one two three four

The Iroquois today. In the late 1800, the most Iroquois men could not find work. 
The reservations were small and few people could support themselves by farming. In 1886 
construction companies hired Mohawk men from the kahnawake reserve in Canada to help build 
a bridge. The bridge crossed the st Lawrence river on the Mohawk reserve near montreal. 
The Mohawk had a good sense of balance and seemed not to fear heights. Their hard work won 
people's praise and gained these Mohawk an international reputation as steelworkers who work 
high on skyscrapers. The Mohawk have built bridges and skyscrapers in Canada and the united 
states. Mohawk steelworkers helped build the George Washington bridge and the Chrysler building 
in new york city. Mohawk crews worked on the golden gate bridge in san Francisco. The Iroquois 
have often disagreed among themselves about the best way to support their people on reservations.
 Reservations cannot support large populations. Adult often must work at jobs off the 
reservations. For example the Iroquois have considered using gambling casinos to help put 
people to work and bring money to the reservations. But casinos have caused many conflicts 
between traditional Iroquois who oppose gambling and those who believe it will help. This 
issue has not yet been settled. Looking to the future. The Iroquois want to help their children
 understand what it means to be Iroquois. Most children attend school in nearby cities and do 
not speak their native languages but some nations want to change that situation. In the 1970 
the Mohawk opened alternative schools in which all classes are taught in Mohawk. Students 
learn mohawk history and traditions. The Tuscarora have an elementary school on their new 
york reservation. the iroquois people want their children to understand what it means to be
part of the six nations. 

Today the Iroquois live in nearly every state of the united states and 
all across Canada. They continue to fight for the right to live on the reservations under 
their own laws. In Canada the six nations reserve issues haudenosaunee passports which 36 
countries accept. These countries recognize the Iroquois as independent nations within 
and Canadian borders. The Iroquois have survived 500 years of conflict with
 other American Indians and with the French british Canadian and  governments.
 The Iroquois know that governments and leaders change but they believe that the culture of 
the Iroquois nations will continue. 

lacrosse
the iroquois often play a ball game called lacrosse. the modern game is similar to a traditional iroquois game
two teams played against one another using crooked sticks made of hickory wood. the sticks had a webbed net on 
one end so teammates could pass a wooden ball to each other and score goals. the ball was the size of a grapefruit
lacrosse taught the boys teamwork that they would need as hunters and fighters. many iroquois believe the 
creator gave them this game and is pleased when they play. many modern iroquois team members have gained an 
international reputation as good lacrosse players. the mohawk boys below have been playing an 
energetic game of lacrosse 


Many Iroquois gather on the reserves and reservations for 
ceremonies and celebrations. 

chapter five
Sharing the traditions. Today council fires burn on the Iroquois
 reservations in the united states and Canada. These fires are signs of Iroquois cooperation.
 One council fire burns at the Onondaga reservation in new york. Another burns at the Onondaga 
longhouse on the six nations reserve in canada. Clans on the Onondaga Tuscarora and Tonawanda Seneca 
reservations in new york still choose traditional chiefs. When an important problem faces the
 Iroquois people the chiefs discuss it at a great council. The reservations are gathering places
 for the Iroquois people. Nearly every reservation has at least one longhouse for ceremonies 
councils and dances. The Iroquois no longer live in these longhouses but they are important to
 the community. Events such as the midwinter ceremony bring many Iroquois back to reservations 
to visit relatives and friends. Some Iroquois wear traditional clothing and headdresses for the 
ceremonies. They recite the prayer of thanksgiving and the story of the peacemaker. Children 
learn that traditions are important to the Iroquois. Although most Iroquois children do not 
speaks their native languages the languages have been preserved. some older people still speak 
their languages and recordings of the languages are available. In their classrooms Iroquois 
children can study these languages. Iroquois dictionaries are available to help translate the 
words. The haudenosaunee passport is written in english French and cayuga or Mohawk. Continuing
 the traditions. Many Iroquois continue to make traditional crafts to sell at reservation stores
 and tourists shops. Women make cornhusk dolls dressed in traditional clothing. They make beadwork
 covered moccasins and jewelry. They continue to make baskets as their ancestors did hundreds of 
years ago. Women who learned basketmaking from their mothers pass the traditional patterns on 
to their children. Modern Iroquois leaders have taken steps to pass on traditional beliefs. 
They have established Iroquois schools. They also teach traditional stories to their children. 
They encourage their children to live a life in harmony with nature. These beliefs have carried 
the Iroquois through years of conflicts and problems. 
many iroquois people wear traditional clothing during ceremonies
an iroquois man dances outside a longhouse modern iroquois are eager to pass on traditions to younger generations
iroquois timeline



The peacemaker unites the Iroquois nations. 
Smallpox and measles kill about half of the Iroquois people. 
The Tuscarora become the sixth 
member of the Iroquois confederacy. 
The American revolutionary war is fought. 
This document 
is a 1769 receipt that the Iroquois gave the british for the sale of Iroquois land. 
The new york
 Iroquois sign the treaty of fort stanwix.
handsome lake brings the good message to the Iroquois. 
The congress passes the Indian removal act. Oren lyons is born. The Mohawk open 
their first Mohawk language schools wampum belts are returned to the Iroquois.

oren lyons
in oren lyons was born in new york he had a traditional childhood on the onondaga and seneca reservations
as a young man he played lacrosse at the onondaga athletic club modern lacrosse developed from a traditional 
iroquois stickball game. lyons joined the syracuse university lacrosse team. lyons went on to become an all 
american lacrosse player and entered the lacrosse hall of fame in. lyons graduated in he earned a degree in
fine arts and spent years as an artist in new york city
lyons then became a faithkeeper for the onondaga turtle clan. clan members choose faithkeepers for their 
knowledge of iroquois traditions and ceremonies as faithkeepers lyons helps settle arguments among clan members
he seeks to protect iroquois reservation lands. lyons is a powerful speaker for nature and the iroquois people he
encourages all people to protect and respect nature. he has spoken to the united nations the earth day foundation
and the audubon society have recognized his work against pollution and overpopulation. 
