
magic tree house a merlin mission dragon 
of the red dawn

dear reader
for many years i have admired japan's literature and art i collect books of
japanese poetry and i also collect books of old japanese prints that show
people going about their everyday lives japanese art and poetry were my 
inspirations for writing this book because I wanted to live in the scenes
the artists and poets created i wanted to ride on a fishing boat sip tea in 
a teahouse see cherry blossom petals float down a river when i'm writing
a book i feel as if i am living in another time and place working on this 
particular magic tree house adventure i couldn't wait to get my writing desk
to every day to visit the world of my dreams mary pope osborne


now i shall dream lulled by the patter of rain and the songs of the frogs
poem from old japan translated by lafcadio hearn 



Prologue 
One summer day in Frog Creek, Pennsylvania, a mysterious tree 
house appeared in the woods. A brother and sister named Jack and Annie 
soon learned that the tree house was magic—it could take them to any 
time and any place in history. They also learned that the tree house 
belonged to Morgan le Fay, a magical librarian from the legendary realm 
of Camelot. 
After Jack and Annie traveled on many adventures for Morgan, Merlin 
the magician began sending them on "Merlin Missions" in the tree house. 
With help from two young sorcerers named Teddy and Kathleen, Jack and 
Annie visited four mythical places and found valuable objects to help save 
Camelot. 
On their next four Merlin Missions, Jack and Annie once again traveled 
to real times and real places in history: Venice, Baghdad, Paris, and New 
York City. After they proved to Merlin that they knew how to use magic 
wisely, he awarded them the Wand of Dianthus, a powerful magic wand 
that will help them make their own magic. Jack and Annie are now waiting 
to hear from Merlin again.... 


Chapter One
For Merlin's Sake 

Tap, tap, tap. 
Jack was dreaming that a white bird was pecking at his window. Tap. 
tap. A red bird appeared and pecked with the white bird. Tap tap. 
"Jack wake up!" said Annie. 
Jack opened his eyes. 
"They're here!" said Annie. 
"Who? The birds?" said Jack. 
"No! Teddy and Kathleen!" Annie rushed to the window and waved 
outside. "They're tossing pebbles at our windows." 
"Teddy and Kathleen!" Jack jumped out of bed and joined Annie at the 
window. 
The two young enchanters of Camelot were standing in Jack and Annie's 
front yard. They were dressed in long, dark cloaks. They smiled and waved 
up at Jack and Annie. 
"Merlin must have sent them!" said Jack. 
Teddy made a walking motion with his fingers and pointed toward the 
Frog Creek woods. 
Annie nodded eagerly. "They want us to meet them at the tree house!" 
she said to Jack. "Hurry and get dressed! Before Mom and Dad wake up!" 
Annie started out of Jack's room. When she got to the door, she turned. 
and don't forget to bring the Wand of Dianthus!" 
Jack threw on his clothes. He grabbed his backpack and peeked inside. 
The wand was there. Jack put his pack on his back. Then he slipped quietly 
downstairs and out the door. 
Annie was standing on the front porch. "Let's go!" she said. 
Jack and Annie ran across their yard and dashed up the sidewalk. 
"I wonder why they came for us!" said Annie. 
"I wonder where we're going!" said Jack. 
"I wonder everything!" said Annie. 
Jack and Annie crossed the street and hurried into the Frog Creek 
woods. The early-March trees looked weary from winter, gray and brown 
with no leaves on them yet. 
"Look—" said Annie, out of breath. "They're waiting for us!" 
Jack looked up. Teddy and Kathleen were waving from the window of 
the magic tree house. 
Jack grabbed the rope ladder and started up. Annie followed. When 
Jack and Annie climbed inside the tree house, they threw their arms 
around Teddy and Kathleen. 
"We're so glad to see you!" cried Annie. 
"And we are happy to see you, also," said Kathleen. The sea girl's lovely 
water-blue eyes sparkled. 
"Indeed," said Teddy. "It has been too long."
"What's our mission this time?" asked Jack. "Where's Merlin sending 
us?"
Teddy glanced at Kathleen. "I fear Merlin does not even know we are 
here," said Teddy. "We have come not at his bidding, but for his sake. 
"What does that mean?" asked Jack. 
"Merlin is not well," said Kathleen. "He complains that he is getting old 
and feeble and that life is full of sorrows. He does not eat or sleep." 
 no!" said Annie. 
"All of Camelot wishes to help him," said Teddy. "But no one knows quite how." 
"What can we do to help?" asked Jack. 
Teddy picked up a book from the corner of the tree house. "Throughout 
the ages, people all over the world have sought the secrets of happiness," 
he said. "Morgan wants you to search for four of these secrets to share 
with Merlin. She believes that the first one might be found here." 
Jack took the book from Teddy. He read the title aloud. A Journey to old Japan.
wow, we've been to Japan before!" said Annie. 
"Before we met you," Jack said to Teddy and Kathleen. "We had an 
adventure with ninjas." 
"Yes, Morgan told us," said Teddy. "But she said that on that journey, 
you visited the countryside. This time you must travel to the capital city." 
"Are you guys coming with us?" asked Annie. 
"I am afraid not, said Kathleen. "We must return to Camelot now to 
help Morgan. Since Merlin has fallen ill, she has taken on much of his 
work. 
"You have the wand, do you not?" asked Teddy. 
 said Jack. He reached into his backpack and took out the Wand 
of Dianthus. The spiraled wand was shaped like a unicorn's horn. 
"With the help of the wand, you will make your own magic," said 
Teddy. 
"That's what Merlin said when he gave it to us," said Annie. 
"But he didn't say how, " said Jack. 
"It is very simple," said Teddy. "The wand has three rules. First it only 
works for the good of others. The wand can never be used for selfish 
reasons." 
"Second, the wand works only after you have tried your very hardest 
without its help," said Kathleen. "Do not attempt to use its magic too 
quickly. " 
"And third, the wand only works with a command of five words," said 
Teddy. "So you must choose your words carefully." 
"Can we review all that, please?" asked Jack. 
"Don't worry, I've got it," said Annie. "We have to go. We have to help 
Merlin as soon as we can. 
"If the tree house takes us to Japan, how will you go back to Camelot?" 
Jack asked Teddy and Kathleen. 
Teddy and Kathleen held up their hands. They each wore a sparkling 
blue ring. "Our magic rings will take us home," said Kathleen. 
"And this book from Camelot's library will bring you back home to Frog 
Creek," said Teddy, "after you have completed your mission." He picked 
up another book lying in a corner. It was the book about Pennsylvania that 
Jack and Annie had used on their first magic tree house adventures. 
"Thanks," said Jack. 
"Good-bye," said Annie. "Take good care of Merlin."
"We will try," said Kathleen. She and Teddy raised their magic rings to 
their lips. They whispered words too softly for Jack and Annie to hear, 
then blew on the rings. As they blew the young sorcerers began to fade 
into the cool morning air. In a moment, they had disappeared completely. 
Silence filled the tree house. 
Annie turned to Jack. "Ready?" she said. 
Jack nodded. He pointed to the cover of the Japan book. "I wish we could go there!"
he said. 
The tree house started to spin. 
It spun faster and faster. 
Then everything was still. 
Absolutely still. 

Chapter Two
The Imperial Garden 
Jack opened his eyes. Soft morning light shone across the floor of the 
tree house. Pink flowers bloomed on a branch outside the window. 
Jack and Annie were wearing brown baggy pants and brown silk robes 
with blue sashes. On their feet were stiff white socks and straw sandals. 
Jack's backpack had turned into a burlap bag. 
"Are we wearing bathrobes?" asked Jack. 
"I think they're called kimonos," said Annie. 
 right," said Jack. "Where'd we land exactly?" Jack and Annie looked out
the window. 
Below the tree house was a beautiful garden filled with cherry trees and 
long-leafed willows. A waterfall tumbled into a sparkling green pool. 
"Wow," said Annie. 
Jack opened the Japan book and found a painting that looked like the 
garden. He read aloud to Annie: 
In the , the Imperial Garden surrounded the Imperial 
Palace in the capital city of Japan. The city was called Edo. say
In the mid, its name was changed to Tokyo.
"Tokyo?" said Annie. "I've always wanted to go to Tokyo!" 
"Me too," said Jack. He read on: 
The late in Japan were years of peace and prosperity. 
Art and culture thrived. But it was a time when the country was 
completely closed to the outside world. No one was allowed to 
come in. The citizens of Edo were frequently checked to make 
sure they had passports. 
"What's a passport exactly?" said Annie. 
"It's an official booklet that says who you are," said Jack. "It also lists the 
different countries you traveled to." He read more: 
Anyone who did not have a passport was considered a spy 
and punished severely. 
"," said Annie. "We don't have passports." 
"Yeah, that's a problem," said Jack. 
"Hey! What if we use the Wand of Dianthus to make passports?" said Annie. 
"Good idea!" said Jack. He peeked inside his bag. Good, the Wand of 
Dianthus was there. 
"Wait, wait," said Annie. "We can't. Remember the rules. We can only 
use the magic wand for the good of others. " 
 right," said Jack. 
"And we have to try our hardest before we use the wand," said Annie. 
"We haven't tried anything yet," said Jack. 
"I guess we should just start looking for a secret of happiness and hope 
no one catches us," said Annie. 
 said Jack, "listen." 
A bell was ringing in the distance. The ringing grew louder. Then came 
the sound of horses. Jack and Annie crouched down. They raised their 
heads just high enough to peek out the window. Through the flowery tree 
branches, they saw a small procession coming through the garden. 
The man leading the procession was ringing a bell. Two men walked 
behind him holding up banners. Behind them four men rode slowly on 
horseback. They all wore baggy trousers and puffy shirts. Their heads were 
shaved, except for knots of black hair. Each had two swords a long one 
and a short one hanging from his belt. 
At the very end of the procession rode a man in a billowing purple robe 
and a small purple hat. Red tassels hung from the bridle of his large black 
horse. 
Jack looked at their research book again. He found a picture that looked 
like the man on the black horse. He read the caption to himself: 
In the, the military ruler known as the shogun say lived in the center of the Imperial Garden in a 
palace that had hundreds of rooms. 
"That last guy is a shogun, " Jack whispered to Annie. "He lives in a big 
palace in the garden." He kept reading: 
Often the warriors traveled with him. They were 
called  samurai say 
"man," whispered Jack. "Those other guys are samurai!" He and 
Annie had barely escaped an armored samurai on their earlier trip to 
Japan. 
 samurai were excellent horsemen well trained in the arts of 
fighting. The code of the samurai samurai was strict. did not 
show their feelings. They had great powers of concentration. 
"They're gone," said Annie. 
Jack looked out the window. The shogun and his warriors had 
disappeared down a tree-shaded dirt road. 
"We should get out of the Imperial Garden fast," said Jack. "If we stay 
here, we're just asking to be caught." 
"How do we get out?" asked Annie. 
Jack looked in the Japan book. He found a map of Edo. "Look," he said, 
pointing at the map. "We have to get over this bridge that leads away from 
the Imperial Garden into the city. The bridge is on the east side of the 
garden." 
"The morning sun is over there," said Annie, squinting into the sunlight. 
"So that must be east. Let's climb down and head that way." 
"Good plan. Then we'll be walking in the opposite direction of those," said Jack. 
"Right," said Annie. She started down the rope ladder. 
"Be careful " said Jack. "We don't want anyone to see us sneaking 
around the Imperial Garden. 
Jack put the Japan book into his burlap bag and slung the bag over his 
shoulder. As he stepped onto the ladder, he nearly tripped on his kimono. 
 brother," he said. He held up the cloth and carefully climbed down. 
Jack joined Annie on a wide path. A gust of dry wind carried petals from 
cherry trees through the air. The long branches of the willows swayed over 
the grass. 
Jack and Annie began heading east, keeping their eyes and ears open for 
more people. They walked past flower beds and big rocks. They walked 
around a pond with swans. They started down a narrow lane between 
blossoming cherry trees. 
Just as they came out from under the trees, Jack and Annie saw four 
men strolling toward them. One man was shorter and older than the 
others. He wore a straw hat and a tattered brown coat and used a walking 
stick. The other three had shaved heads with topknots, and two swords 
hung from each of their belts. 
samurai  whispered Jack. 
 said Annie. 
"Run!" said Jack. 
Jack and Annie turned around and started running back down the 
narrow lane. 
Jack heard the men running after them. "Halt!" cried a samurai samurai 
Jack grabbed Annie's hand and they stumbled to a halt. Out of breath, 
they turned to face the three who were rushing toward them. 
"Who are you?" one of the  barked. He was holding up his 
sword. Why do you run from us? Are you spies?" 
Just as Jack was about to answer he heard a voice shout, "Baku! Koto!" 
The man with the walking stick and straw hat was hurrying toward 
them. "Baku Koto, what are you doing here?" he called out to Jack and 
Annie. "Why did you not wait for me at the bridge?" 

Chapter Three
Basho

The three samurai turned to the man with the walking stick. "You 
know them, Master?" one asked. 
"Yes, of course," the man said. "This boy and girl are Baku and Koto, my 
best students." 
"Hi, Master!" said Annie, pretending she knew who the man was. "We 
couldn't find the bridge, so we we 
"We came here to look for you," said Jack. 
"And now you have found me," said the man. "I am sorry you were 
frightened by my friends. " 
The samurai put away his sword. "Forgive me," he said, bowing before 
Jack and Annie. 
"Sure, no problem," said Annie. 
The turned to the small man. "We will leave you with your 
students now," he said. "Thank you, Most Honored Master, for your visit 
with us today." All three warriors bowed deeply before the man. Then they 
walked away. 
“What did the samurai call the small man "Most Honored Master"? Jack 
wondered. 
When the samurai were gone, the man turned to Jack and Annie. His 
eyes twinkled. "I believe you are safe now," he said. 
"Thanks " said Annie. "But I'm afraid we're not Baku and Koto." 
"No, you are not," said the man. "But you are not spies, either, are you?" 
"No," said Jack. 
"I did not think so," said the man. "That is why I thought you needed my 
help. 
"Thank you," said Jack. 
"You are most welcome," said the man. "Now perhaps you will tell me 
who you really are, and how you came to be here in the Imperial Garden." 
"Our names are Jack and Annie," said Jack. "And we—" He paused. It 
seemed impossible to explain: Teddy and Kathleen's visit, Merlin's sorrow, 
Morgan's research book. 
"We came here to search for a secret of happiness," said Annie. 
The man smiled. "I believe that is something we all seek," he said. "But 
you must be very careful, Jack and Annie. The shogun does not allow 
foreigners into our country. If you do not have passports, you could be 
caught and punished.”
"We know," said Annie. "what should we do?" 
"Perhaps you should travel with me today," said the man. "You can 
continue to be my students, Baku and Koto." 
"Good plan!" said Jack. 
"You must remember, seek harmony with your surroundings," said the 
man. "Observe the people of Edo and do as they do. If you do not stand 
out, you will not be noticed by the." 
"Got it " said Annie. 
Seek harmony with your surroundings. Observe the people of Edo and 
do as they do, Jack repeated to himself. 
"Come," said the man. He started walking briskly through the garden. 
Jack and Annie hurried after him. "Excuse me, but what's your name?" 
Annie said. 
"My friends call me Basho," the man answered. 
"Basho? That's a cute name!" said Annie. 
"And why did the call you "Most Honored Master"?" asked Jack. 
"Because I am their teacher," said Basho. 
"What do you teach them?" asked Jack. 
Basho smiled. "Today they learned how to listen to a cricket in a 
woodpile," he said, "and how to think like a frog." 
"Cool," said Jack. Those must be warrior skills, he thought, special 
ways to listen for an enemy or jump around with a sword. He 
remembered how ninjas used secrets of nature to fight their enemies. 
Basho led Jack and Annie through a wooden gate in a high wall. They 
walked over a wide stone bridge that crossed a moat. When they came to 
the other side of the bridge, they followed a path that led to a small boat 
dock on a river. 
Three fishermen were loading wicker baskets into a long flat-bottomed 
boat. Hundreds of shiny little fish were inside each basket. 
Basho walked over to the fishermen. "Good morning," he said. 
"Good morning, Master Basho," the fishermen said. All of them bowed. 
Everyone seems to know Basho, Jack thought. 
"May my students and I ride with you down the river?" asked Basho. 
"yes, of course, Master Basho!" one of the men said. "We would be 
most honored to carry you in our humble boat!" 
"Thank you," said Basho. 
Jack and Annie followed Basho onto the deck of the boat and sat next to 
the wicker baskets. 
One of the fishermen untied the boat, and the others used long poles to 
push it away from the dock. The men began poling down the river. 
The fishing boat floated under a series of bridges, moving in and out of 
shadows and glittering light. As it passed under one of the bridges, it 
scraped the bottom of the river. Basho, Jack, and Annie were thrown 
forward. 
"Forgive us, Master!" one of the fishermen called to Basho. "The river is 
very shallow." 
"There has been no rain for a long time," said another fisherman. "It is 
very worrisome to us." 
"Yes, it worries me, too," said Basho. 
"What's everyone so worried about?" Annie asked Basho. 
"When the weather is very dry, the people of Edo worry about fire," said 
Basho. "Twenty-five years ago, during a dry spell, half our city was 
destroyed by a terrible fire. Thousands died." 
 that's awful!" said Annie. 
"Yes. Since then, everyone has worked hard to rebuild the capital," said 
Basho. "Edo is now even more beautiful than before. In fact, along this 
riverbank are many new castles of the samurai . See? There one hides 
now." 
Basho pointed at a steep rocky cliff above the riverbank. Jack shaded his 
eyes as he looked at the curved roof and high stone walls of a  
castle. "Its largest room is called the Thousand-Mat Hall," said Basho. 
"What does that mean?" asked Jack. 
"It means the room can hold a thousand floor mats," said Basho. 
"Cool," said Annie. "Basho, where do you live?" 
Basho smiled. "My castle is on the other side of the Great Bridge," he 
said. 
Jack wondered how many mats Basho's castle could hold. 
Beyond the steep cliffs the boat traffic grew heavier. Now there were 
many boats floating on the wide river: big sailboats, barges loaded with 
lumber, and ferries filled with passengers holding parasols. 
The fishing boat glided toward a crowded dock next to a market. In the 
market, thousands of gleaming fish were laid out on tables. Men and 
women also sold fish and other sea creatures from baskets that hung from 
poles across their shoulders. "Shrimp!" "Tuna!" "Octopus!" "Eel!" they 
shouted. 
"Wait for us while we deliver the fish," Basho said to Jack and Annie. 
"Then we will travel further on the river." 
The fishermen tied up the boat. Jack and Annie waited on the landing as 
Basho helped the crew unload the wicker baskets. Then each man put a 
basket on his head and started up the stone steps that led to the fish 
market. 
no!" said Annie. "Look!" She pointed toward the other end of the 
dock. 
Jack looked. He saw several samurai getting off a boat. "Quick! Grab a 
basket!" he said. 
Jack and Annie each picked up a basket of fish. As Jack tried to lift the 
basket to his head, he tilted it. A couple of fish hit him on the nose as they 
fell to the dock. 
"Leave them! Come on!" whispered Annie. 
Carrying the baskets on their heads, Jack and Annie followed Basho and 
the fishermen up the steps and delivered their fish to a young woman at 
one of the tables. Jack glanced back at the river. The samurai were 
standing on the landing, checking someone's passport. 
Jack looked at Basho. Basho was watching the samurai, too. He turned 
to the fishermen. "Thank you for the ride," he said calmly, bowing to the 
men. "We will walk from here." 
The fishermen nodded and smiled. 
Good plan, Jack thought, relieved. 
"Come," said Basho. He led Jack and Annie away from the market. Soon 
they came to a busy road crowded with pedestrians and travelers on 
horseback. 
As they walked along with the crowd, Jack remembered Basho's words: 
"Seek harmony with your surroundings." He tried to blend in by walking 
at a steady pace. Keeping his eyes down, he worried about their mission. 
How will we ever find the secret of happiness, he wondered, if we have to 
keep dodging the samurai? 
"Look at that bridge!" said Annie. 
Jack glanced up. A high, arched bridge spanned the river. Hundreds of 
people were walking across it. 
"That is the Great Bridge," said Basho. "It will lead us away from the 
heart of Edo to the bank of the Sumida River, where I live." 
"Great," said Jack. He hoped they would be safer away from the heart of 
Edo. Then maybe they could focus on their search for the secret. 
Jack, Annie, and Basho joined the crowd crossing the bridge. They 
walked single file, close to the wooden railing. Jack stared straight ahead, 
careful not to look anyone in the eye. He saw people having picnics on the 
other side of the bridge. Kids were flying red kites. 
"What's that mountain?" said Annie. She pointed to a snowcapped 
mountain looming in the distance. The white cone of the gray mountain 
rose above fleecy, rose-tinted clouds. 
"That is a volcanic mountain called Mount Fuji," said Basho. 
 I've heard of Mount Fuji!" said Jack. "That's the highest mountain
in Japan, right?" 
"Yes, and the most beautiful," said Basho. 
"It is beautiful," said Annie. 
Jack looked around. Actually, he thought everything seemed beautiful at 
that moment: the green and yellow parasols of the ferryboat passengers 
below, the pink cherry trees shimmering at the river's edge, the red kites 
and white seagulls gliding through the sky. 
"I love Japan," Jack said softly. 
"I do, too," said Basho. "We call our world "the floating world," for it 
seems to float on beauty." 
"It really does," murmured Jack. Walking across the Great Bridge, he 
felt as if he himself were floating through the floating world. 

chapter four 
sushi and sumo 
Basho led Jack and Annie off the Great Bridge and down a crowded 
road. They passed huge stacks of lumber. Then they came to a row of 
stages built along the riverbank. On one stage women were dancing. Their 
faces were painted white. They wore shimmering kimonos and waved fans. 
Musicians played on a second stage. They plucked three-stringed 
instruments and blew on bamboo flutes. Their music was high-pitched 
and strange, but Jack liked it. 
On another stage was a puppet show. Puppeteers wearing black clothes 
moved a giant dragon puppet around the stage. A man stood to the side 
and told a story to the audience. From the back of the crowd, it was hard to 
hear him. 
"What's he saying?" said Annie. 
He is telling the legend of the Cloud Dragon," said Basho. "The Cloud 
Dragon is one of the guardian animals of the four directions. She has the 
power of flight and commands the rain clouds." 
"Cool," said Annie. 
Basho led them on past rows of stalls where craftspeople sold beads, 
cloth, kites, and paper lanterns. Some boys were holding up yo yos for 
sale. Jack was surprised to see yo-yos in old Japan. 
Beyond the craft stalls was a row of inns and cafes. The smell of spices 
and grilled fish filled the air. 
 said Annie. 
Jack was hungry, too. 
"Would you like to stop at a teahouse?" Basho asked them. 
"Yes!" Jack and Annie said together. 
Basho led them toward a small building with an open front. At the 
entrance, Basho slipped off his sandals. Jack and Annie did the same. They 
placed their sandals in a row of shoes that other people had left by the 
door. 
Inside the teahouse, cooks stirred steaming pots over a wood-burning 
stove. People sat at long low tables, eating with chopsticks and drinking 
from small cups. Several customers smiled shyly and bowed before Basho. 
Basho must be a really famous teacher of the samurai, thought Jack. It 
made Jack feel important to be with him. 
Basho led them to a table and sat cross-legged on a straw mat. Jack and 
Annie did the same. A waiter with a kerchief around his head hurried to 
the table. "Welcome to our humble teahouse, Master Basho!" he said. 
"Thank you," said Basho. 
Everyone is so polite in Japan! Jack thought. 
The waiter handed Jack, Annie, and Basho warm wet towels. "Thank 
you," said Jack and Annie. 
Jack watched Basho wipe his hands on the towel. He and Annie did the 
same. Then they all gave their towels back to the waiter. 
"I would like plates of sushi for me and my two students, please," said 
Basho. 
"Thank you," said the waiter, bowing. 
While they waited for their food, Jack studied the people in the room. 
Jack noticed that even little kids were eating with chopsticks. He and 
Annie had never had much luck using chopsticks in Asian restaurants back 
home. 
Soon the waiter brought over three plates of small cakes of sticky rice 
wrapped in dark green, paper-like strips. He also brought napkins and 
three pairs of chopsticks. 
When the waiter had gone, Basho spoke to Jack and Annie in a soft 
voice so no one else could hear. "We call this sushi, "he said. 
"It is rice with 
pieces of raw fish in the middle." 
"Raw fish?" said Jack. He gulped. 
"And what's this part?" Annie pointed at the papery wrapping. 
"Seaweed," said Basho. 
"Seaweed?" said Jack. 
"It is very good," said Basho. 
Jack was so hungry he was willing to try anything, even raw fish and 
seaweed. His only problem was the chopsticks. 
"Try it this way, Jack," said Annie. She carefully picked up a piece of 
sushi between the wooden ends of her chopsticks. Jack copied her. But as 
they both tried to bring their food to their mouths, their pieces of sushi fell 
onto the table. 
Jack and Annie laughed and tried a second time. Annie was successful. 
But Jack dropped his sushi again. Without thinking, he grabbed it with his 
fingers and popped it into his mouth. 
said Jack. The vinegar-tasting rice, the raw fish and the green, 
salty seaweed were delicious! 
But Jack stopped in mid-chew. Two samurai at another table were 
glaring at him. One of the men had a big scar on his face. The other had 
fierce dark eyes. 
Jack's throat was dry as he swallowed. They saw me mess up with my 
chopsticks! he thought. They can tell I'm not from Japan! He picked up 
another piece of sushi with his chopsticks. He glanced again at the 
samurai. They were watching him like hawks. 
Jack's hand felt shaky. He tried to stay calm. He remembered a passage 
from their research book: Samurai did not show their feelings. They had 
great powers of concentration. 
Jack tried very hard not to show his fear. He concentrated on holding 
the sushi with his chopsticks. He raised the sushi to his mouth and ate it 
calmly. He lowered his chopsticks and picked up another piece of sushi. 
He ate it calmly. 
When Jack looked back at the samurai, they were no longer watching 
him. Jack let out his breath. He picked up his last piece of sushi with his 
chopsticks and ate it calmly. 
"Very good," said Basho, smiling at him. 
"Thanks," said Jack. 
"Let us go now," said Basho. 
Basho folded his napkin neatly and left it beside his plate. Jack and 
Annie did the same. Basho paid for their meals and then they stopped at 
the entranceway to put on their shoes. As they stepped outside, a drum 
began beating loudly. A huge crowd had gathered on the grassy riverbank. 
"What's happening?" Annie asked. 
"Come, I will show you," said Basho. 
People moved aside so Basho could lead Jack and Annie to the front of 
the crowd. 
A large ring had been marked off on the ground with straw. In the 
middle of the circle, two enormously fat men squatted at opposite sides of 
the ring. Each man looked as if he weighed more than four hundred 
pounds. They clapped their hands. Then each began stomping his feet. 
"Who are they?" said Annie, her eyes wide. 
"Sumo wrestlers," said Basho. "Sumo wrestling has been our most 
popular sport for over a thousand years." 
The two wrestlers were now perfectly still. Crouching down with 
clenched fists, they were glaring at one another. The whole crowd seemed 
to hold its breath as the wrestlers stared into each other's eyes. Suddenly 
one wrestler lunged forward and grabbed the other. Then the hugely fat 
men began pushing each other around. 
"They are trying to force each other out of the ring," said Basho. 
Grunting and groaning, the two men moved backward and forward as 
spectators cheered wildly. Then one wrestler made a quick move and 
shoved his rival out of the circle. The crowd roared. Jack found himself 
cheering, too. 
When the noise died down, Basho turned to Jack and Annie. "The first 
match is over," he said. "Shall we go now?" 
Before Jack and Annie could answer him, two samurai stepped in front 
of them. One had a big scar on his face. The other had fierce dark eyes. 
"Excuse me," the scar-faced man said. "May we see your passports, 
please?" 


Chapter Five
An Excellent Student? 
Jack froze. 
Basho stepped forward. When the two samurai saw him, they bowed. 
"Good afternoon, Master," one said. 
"Good afternoon," said Basho. "These are my students, Koto and Baku. I 
am afraid they left their passports at home today. " 
"They are your students?" said the samurai with the scar. 
"Yes, excellent students," said Basho. "They have much natural talent. 
 The two samurai looked at Jack and Annie with interest. "Will you 
share your talent with us?" one asked smiling. 
What talent? Jack wondered frantically. Some samurai warrior talent? 
Basho saw Jack's confusion. "Perhaps you would each recite one of your 
poems" he said. 
"One of our poems?" squeaked Jack. What kind of samurai talent is 
that? he wondered. Do samurai warriors have to know poems? 
"Sure," said Annie. "Here's a poem." She took a deep breath and then 
recited: 
Twinkle, twinkle, little star, 
How I wonder what you are. 
Up above the world so high, 
Like a diamond in the sky. 
The samurai with the scar nodded. "Very good, Koto," he said. "The little 
star twinkles like a diamond." 
The other samurai closed his eyes as if he were seeing the star. "Yes, yes, 
very good!" he said. "A sparkling diamond high above the world! 
Excellent. " 
Both samurai then turned to Jack. "And you, Baku?" one said. 
Jack stared at them. He couldn't remember any poem—not even a 
nursery rhyme! 
a poem? Right," said Jack.  Let's see.... Okay." He took a 
deep breath and said: 
I love Japan. 
man. 
I really love Japan. 
The land of Japan 
Is cool. 
Jack bit his lip. He knew his poem was bad. He glanced at Annie. She 
looked as if she were trying not to laugh. 
The dark-eyed samurai turned to Basho. "An excellent student?" he said. 
Basho nodded. "Well, yes.... Baku has a—a special talent. He needs 
work, but the talent is there. " 
The samurai frowned. "You say he left his passport at home, Master 
Basho? Where is his home?" 
Just then the drumbeat started again. The samurai turned to look. A 
new sumo match was beginning. The two samurai moved closer to the ring 
to get a better look. 
Basho turned to Jack and Annie. "We should leave now, " he said calmly. 
"I will take you to my home, where you will be safe. " 
Jack, Annie, and Basho quickly left the sumo crowd and blended in with 
shoppers walking down a busy street. Peddlers carried long poles over 
their shoulders with baskets swinging on the ends. They shouted about 
their wares: "Shoes and socks!" "Cakes and pastries!" "Rope and twine!" 
One woman had a large box strapped to her back. "Books! Books!" she 
shouted. 
"No thank you," said Jack. He loved books, but he kept going. He was 
afraid the samurai might show up again at any moment. 
A boy carried birdcages and shouted, "Birds! Birds!" 
Suddenly Jack felt a hand on his shoulder. He nearly had a heart attack! 
But it was just Basho. "I live that way," said Basho, pointing. "Over the 
bridge." 
Jack and Annie walked with Basho over a small, narrow bridge that 
crossed a canal. 
Basho led them past a temple, then past small bamboo houses with 
chickens in their yards. Little children were spinning tops on the dusty 
ground. One called out, "Hello, Master Basho!" Basho smiled and waved. 
Then Jack and Annie walked with Basho along the dirt path bordering 
the river. Tall pine trees lined the riverbank. A dry wind blew leaves and 
pine needles into the shallows. Jack started to breathe more easily. He felt 
safer now. 
The trail grew more narrow. The sun slipped behind the tops of the 
trees. Jack was eager to get to Basho's castle. He looked for a steep roof 
and high stone walls like the castles of the samurai. 
Through the deepening shadows of twilight, Basho led them to a 
clearing not far from the river. 
At the center of the clearing was a pond overgrown with weeds. On the 
far side of the pond, moss-covered stones led to the door of a tiny hut. The 
hut was made of bamboo and had a roof of wood shingles. Next to the 
small hut was a large plant with droopy green leaves. 
"Welcome to my castle, " said Basho. 


Chapter Six
The Banana Tree 

"This is your castle?" said Jack. 
Basho smiled. "In my heart, my humble cottage is grander than all the 
castles of the samurai," he explained. "And my banana tree is more 
beautiful to me than all the beauty of the Imperial Garden. 
Jack and Annie stared at the large plant with the long, droopy leaves. 
"I like this tree so much I have taken my name from it," said Basho. 
"Basho means "banana tree." 
"Cool," said Annie. She looked around. "It's nice here. 
Not really, thought Jack. The cottage was shabby and the droopy 
banana tree looked scrawny and sad to him. 
"Please come inside," said Basho. He slipped off his sandals and left 
them outside. He picked up a bundle of wood, then ducked through the 
low door that led into his hut. 
Jack and Annie took off their shoes, too, and followed Basho into a 
small, shadowy room. 
Basho opened his shutters to let in the evening air. "Please sit, " he said. 
"Thank you," said Jack and Annie. Jack looked around the room for 
chairs, but there weren't any. The only furniture was a low wooden table 
and a bamboo chest. Three straw mats covered the earthen floor. Jack and 
Annie sat down on one of the mats. 
Basho lit a small oil lamp. Then he made a fire in his fireplace. "I will 
prepare tea for us," he said. "Rest while I draw water from the river." He 
picked up one of the two wooden buckets near the door and headed 
outside. 
when Basho was gone, Jack and Annie looked at each other. "I guess 
this is a three-mat house," said Annie. 
Jack nodded. "You'd think a famous teacher of the samurai would have 
a hundred-mat house or at least a fifty-mat house," he said. 
"I like this house, though," said Annie. "It's cozy." 
"I wonder who Basho is exactly, " said Jack. 
"If he's famous, maybe he's in our book," said Annie. "Look him up." 
"Good idea," said Jack He pulled the research book out of his bag. By 
the light of the crackling fire, he looked up Basho in the index. "He is 
here!" Jack turned to the right page and read aloud. 
Basho is one of Japan's greatest poets. 
He wrote short, beautiful poems that 
speak to people as clearly today as they 
did during the Edo period of Japan. 
"Basho's a great poet!" said Annie. That explains everything!" 
"Sort of said Jack "It explains why we had to recite poems to the 
samurai. But it doesn't explain why Basho lives in such a dinky house." 
Basho opened the door and came in with his bucket. Jack closed the 
book and slipped it back into his bag. 
Basho poured river water into an iron pot over the fire. He pulled three 
tiny bowls and a small cloth bag from the bamboo chest. He took loose 
green tea from the bag and dropped it into the bowls. Then he waited 
patiently for the water to boil. 
Jack and Annie waited patiently, too. Listening to the soft rushing 
sounds of the river outside, Jack started to feel peaceful for the first time 
all day. 
When the water was hot, Basho poured some into each of the tea bowls. 
Then he handed the warm bowls to Annie and Jack. 
"Thank you," said Annie. 
"Thank you, " said Jack. 
"You are welcome," said Basho. 
Jack carefully took a sip from the steaming bowl. The green tea tasted 
bitter, but he didn't mind it. 
 interesting taste," said Annie. "Basho, Jack was wondering, if you're a 
famous poet, why do you live in such a dinky house?"
"Annie!" said Jack, embarrassed. "She's kidding. I wasn't really wondering that."
Basho laughed. "Long ago, I trained to be a samurai," he said. "But I was not happy.
All I wanted to do was write poetry. A poet does not need to live in a castle. A 
poet needs to live with the wind and the clouds, the flowers and the birds. Here, I 
have a small garden and my banana tree. I have the sound of the river all day long. 
Here, I have everything I need to write my poems."
"What do you write about?" said Annie.
"Small things," said Basho.  "A crow picking snails out of the mud, a woodpecker
hammering a tree, pine needles scattered by the wind. A poet finds beauty in all the
small things of nature."
"And you teach the poetry to the samurai?"
"Yes, the samurai greatly honor the art of poetry," said Basho. "Poetry helps focus 
the mind. The samurai believe a truly brave warrior should be able to compose a poem
even in the midst of an earthquake, or while facing an enemy on the battlefield."
"Can you say one of your poems for us?" asked Annie.
"Let me think," said Basho. "Well... I was working on a new poem yesterday." He 
reached for a wooden box under the table. He took a small piece of delicate paper
from the box and read aloud:

An old pond: a frog jumps in- the sound of water.

Basho looked up at Jack and Annie.
 said Jack. "Nice beginning."
"It is not just the beginning," said Basho. "It is the whole poem. A small 
moment in time. " 
"I think it's great," said Annie. "I love frogs. Your poem makes me love 
them even more. " 
"Would you read it again, please?" Jack said. He felt like he must have 
missed something. 
Basho read again: 
An old pond: 
a frog jumps in— 
the sound of water. 
Jack nodded thoughtfully. "Good," he said. "It's really good." And he 
meant it. The poem made him feel as if he himself had been right there, by 
that pond, hearing the frog splash into the water, breaking the silence. 
"If you like it, you may have it," said Basho. He handed the paper to 
Jack. 
"Thanks!" said Jack. As he put the poem in his bag, a bell rang softly in 
the distance. 
 the temple bells," said Basho. He stood up. "It is time to rest. I will 
take a mat and sleep outside. I enjoy sleeping under the stars. And now, 
because of the poem you recited today, Annie, I shall think of them as 
diamonds in the sky." 
Annie smiled. 
"You can stay inside and cover yourselves with these mosquito nets," 
said Basho. He pulled some nets from the bamboo chest and handed them 
to Jack and Annie. "But do not worry, in my small house there are only 
small mosquitoes— not giant ones like those in the Imperial Palace. " 
Jack and Annie laughed at Basho's joke. He gave a net to each of them. 
Then he picked up one of the mats from the floor and pulled it outside, 
closing the door behind him.
The fire in the fireplace had died down. The light from the oil lamp had nearly
gone out, too. Jack and Annie lay on the straw mats and covered themselves with the 
mosquito nets. A cricket chirped on the hearth. Jack noticed a patch of light on
the floor. He realized it was moonlight coming through the open window. 
Jack reached out from under the net and put his hand on the square of pale
moonlight. He could hear the rustling of the banana plant in the breeze. Half asleep,
he imagined himself swaying with its long broad leaves.
"This dinky hut is much nicer than a castle," Annie murmured. "I feel like we're 
tiny crickets going to sleep."
"Yeah... I feel like I'm holding moonlight in my hand," said Jack, "and like I'm
a banana leaf... dancing in the wind."
"Sounds like a poem," said Annie.
"Yeah... maybe I should write it down...," said Jack. But instead, he feel fast asleep.

Chapter Seven
Clang, Clang, Clang! 

Clang, clang, clang! 
Jack opened his eyes. The sound of bells filled the night—not the gentle 
dinging of the temple bells but a harsh clanging. 
Jack smelled smoke. He and Annie threw off their mosquito nets and 
stumbled to the door. 
Basho was standing in his yard, looking at the dawn sky. It was black 
with smoke. The bells kept clanging. 
"Is there a fire?" asked Jack 
"Yes," said Basho. "It must be very big, for the bells do not stop ringing 
from the watch-tower. This is what we have feared most. I must go and 
help the firefighters. " 
"We'll help, too," said Jack. 
"No, stay here," said Basho. He pulled on his socks and sandals, then 
grabbed a wooden bucket by the door. "If the fire gets close, wade into the 
river, where you will be safe. " 
"But we want to help!" said Annie. 
"Yes, wait for us!" said Jack. He and Annie pulled on their socks and 
sandals. 
"Come, then," said Basho. "But if the fire begins to spread, you must 
promise to return here to the river." 
"We promise!" said Annie. 
"Then bring the other bucket and follow me, " said Basho. 
"I'll get it," said Jack. He hurried into the hut and grabbed the wooden 
bucket by the hearth. It was heavy, even without water in it. Jack hugged 
the bucket to his chest and rushed back outside. 
Jack and Annie followed Basho through the pine forest. They passed a 
farmhouse where two small children stood outside, looking at the fiery 
sky. 
"Our father says the lumberyard near the river is burning!" the boy 
shouted to Basho. 
"He has gone to help fight the fire!" said the girl. "Great piles of wood 
are burning!" 
The fire bells kept clanging as Basho, Jack, and Annie rushed past the 
temple and across the narrow footbridge. 
They hurried up the winding dirt path until they came to the shopping 
market. In the smoky red dawn, people were pushing carts piled high with 
goods. They were running away from the fire. 
But Basho, Jack, and Annie ran toward the fire. The air grew hotter and 
smokier near the teahouses and the performance stages. Sparks flew 
through the sky. Tiles on rooftops were catching fire and crashing to the 
ground. 
Basho led Jack and Annie farther through the smoke until they came to 
the lumberyard. The fire roared as it burned piles of logs. Flames rose high 
into the sky. 
Firefighters were passing buckets of water up a line from the river to the 
fire. Others waved huge fans to beat back the windblown flames, while the 
most daring worked with hooks and axes, trying to separate the burning 
timber. 
Help the bucket brigade!" Basho said to Jack and Annie. "Get water 
from the river!" 
Basho rushed to help the men beating back the fire with fans while Jack 
and Annie hurried down to the river. Jack filled their wooden bucket. With 
water inside, it was so heavy he couldn't lift it. 
"Do it together!" said Annie. 
"Right!" said Jack. 
Using all their strength, Jack and Annie carried their bucket up the bank 
of the river. As they stumbled along, they tried not to spill the water. Jack 
could hardly breathe in the smoke-filled air. His throat and eyes burned. 
His face felt red-hot. Finally, when he thought he couldn't take another 
step, they got to the bucket brigade. They gave their bucket to the person 
at the end, who gave them an empty bucket. "Get more!" he said. 
Jack and Annie hurried back to the river with the empty bucket. They 
filled it with water and then struggled back up the bank. 
Over and over, Jack and Annie hauled buckets of water back and forth 
from the river to the line of firefighters. Everyone worked hard to battle 
the great blaze. But the flames kept shooting into the sky. Eventually the 
fire leapt over the river, and timber on the far bank began to burn. 
no!" cried a woman. "All of Edo will catch fire now!" 
"The rice-storage houses will burn down!" said a man. "The harvest will 
be destroyed! " 
Several people began weeping. Jack felt like crying, too. Right in front of 
his eyes, the beautiful floating world of Edo was about to go up in flames. 
"This is hopeless!" he said to Annie. 
"No, it's not!" Annie said. "The wand! We can use the wand!" 
"Of course!" cried Jack. "But it's in my bag! Back at Basho's house!" 
"We have to get it!" said Annie. She shouted to Basho, "Basho, we're 
going back to your castle!" 
"Yes, run for safety!" called Basho. "Jump into the river!" 
"Right!" cried Jack. 
"Be careful!" Annie shouted to Basho. Then she and Jack started 
running as fast as they could. They raced past the market. They ran across 
the footbridge, past the temple and the farmhouse, and through the grove 
of pines to Basho's house. 
Jack and Annie ran inside the tiny hut. Jack grabbed his bag and pulled 
out the wand. He waved it through the air. "Do something to make the fire 
stop!" he shouted. 
Jack held his breath and waited. 
"Let me try!" said Annie. She took the wand and waved it. "Stop the fire 
over Edo now!" she shouted. 
Jack and Annie waited again. 
"It's not working!" cried Jack. "We must be doing something wrong. 
"But this is for the good of everyone!" said Annie. 
"I know, I know!" said Jack. 
"And we've tried our hardest!" said Annie. "Everybody has!" 
"Five words!" said Jack. "We have to use five words!" 
"right!" said Annie. She waved the wand through the air again. 
Put. Out. The. Fire!" she yelled. 
 "One more word!" cried Jack. 
 "Please!" shouted Annie. 
 Jack and Annie were blasted by a blinding light. Jack felt himself 
shooting through brightness, then darkness, then back into light. An icy 
wind blew. The air was crystal-clear. Early sunlight flashed on rock. 
Jack and Annie were standing on the ledge of a mountain. 

Chapter Eight
In the Red Dawn 
"Are you are you okay?" Annie asked Jack. She was still holding the 
wand. Her pigtails blew in the bright wind. 
"Yeah, yeah, but what happened?" said Jack in a daze. He was freezing 
and out of breath. "Where are we?" 
"I don't know," whispered Annie. 
Jack shielded his eyes from the brilliant light of the red dawn and 
looked around. Pink clouds floated through the air like piles of cotton 
candy. Through a gap in the clouds, he saw hills shrouded in black smoke 
below. Beneath the smoke, flames rose from the city of Edo. 
"I think we're on Mount Fuji," said Annie. 
"Mount Fuji?" said Jack. "That's crazy! Why are we here?" He stopped 
to catch his breath. He felt dizzy and light-headed. "Edo's burning! We 
should be there!" 
"Maybe the wand didn't understand," said Annie. "Maybe it was trying 
to save us by taking us far away from the fire." 
Suddenly a great mass of thick clouds piled up, ringing the mountaintop 
like a wall. The clouds swirled and whirled and tumbled. They changed 
color, from rose to gold to gray to white. 
"what's going on?" cried Jack. 
The head of a gigantic monster rose from the bubbling clouds! 
"Jack and Annie screamed. They grabbed each other and 
crouched down on the rocky ledge. 
The monster had spiky eyebrows and long, curled whiskers. It had the 
horns of a deer, the forked tongue of a snake, and the fiery breath of a 
dragon. Through the swirling clouds, Jack and Annie could see the 
dragon's snake-like body curling through the clouds and down the 
mountainside. Its back was covered with shiny scales. Its spine had a row 
of shark-like fins. 
The dragon reached out its claws. They were like the claws of an eagle 
only a thousand times bigger! The claws gripped the side of the mountain. 
Jack made himself as small as he could. He covered his head. But Annie 
jumped to her feet. "I get it!" she cried. "I know what's happening! Thank 
you for coming!" 
"Annie, get down!" Jack shouted. 
"Jack, it's the Cloud Dragon!" said Annie. 
the puppet show remember? The wand sent her here!" 
"what? Why?" cried Jack. 

"She makes rain! Don't you remember? Rain!" cried Annie. "She 
commands the rain clouds!" 
The dragon lowered her giant head, stretching it over the mountain 
ledge. Her scales glittered honey-gold in the dawn light. She was still, very 
still, as if she were waiting for something. 
"Come on! We have to climb on her back!" shouted Annie. 
"Why?" cried Jack 
"We have to go with her!" said Annie. "The wand brought us to the 
dragon! Now it's up to us to show her what to do!" 
"Okay! Okay!" said Jack. 
Annie climbed onto the back of the Cloud Dragon. She sat between two 
of the dragon's shark-like fins. Jack climbed on behind her. He gripped the 
fin in front of him as if he were holding on to the horn of a saddle. 
"Fly over the fire!" yelled Annie. "Make rain!" 
"Lots of it!" shouted Jack. 
The Cloud Dragon slid off the mountain ledge. Jack trembled with cold 
as the monster slithered through the freezing sea of clouds, like a snake 
through the grass. 
Above Edo, Jack looked down. Billowing black smoke and red flames 
shot into the dawn sky. 
"Now! Rain now!" Jack said. The Cloud Dragon reared back her head. 
Great black clouds flowed from her mouth. The clouds spread across the 
sky. There was a crack of thunder and a flash of lightning. Then rain began 
to pour down on the city. 
The dragon twisted her head this way and that. More clouds blew from 
her mouth, and more rain fell on the burning city of Edo. 
As the dragon slithered through the sky, breathing out mountains of 
storm clouds, rain fell 
on the flat lands of the rice fields 
on the Imperial Garden 
the samurai castles, 
the fish market, 
and the Great Bridge. 
Rain fell on the floating world of inns and stages, teahouses, temples, 
and farms. 
Rain fell on the lumberyard and the pine forest and the canals. 
Slowly the rain washed away all the smoke and flames. Even after the 
fires of Edo no longer flickered the Cloud Dragon breathed more black 
clouds, and the rain kept falling, falling steadily, soaking the gardens and 
fields, filling the shallow rivers and dried-up ponds. 
"The fire's out!" Jack shouted. 
"Take us to Basho's!" Annie yelled to the dragon. 
The Cloud Dragon twisted her giant body. She slid through the dark 
clouds. Then she reared up—until Jack and Annie couldn't hold on any 
longer and they were falling backward, somersaulting through the air! 
SPLASH! SPLASH! 
Jack sank to the bottom of the river. He flailed his arms and struggled to 
the surface. His head bobbed up he spewed out water and gasped for air. 
He had lost his glasses. He dove back down and grabbed them from the 
river bottom, then swam back to the surface. Treading water he wiped his 
glasses, then put them on. 
"Hi!" Annie yelled. She was holding the wand in the air, above the water. 
"Hi!" Jack yelled back. 
Jack and Annie swam toward the bank of the river. They swam until 
their feet could touch bottom. Then they dragged themselves out of the 
water and collapsed on the muddy bank. 
They had lost their socks and sandals. Their silk kimonos clung to their 
bodies. Dripping wet, they gasped for breath and looked up at the sky. 
Big drops of rain splashed on their faces. There was no sign of the Cloud 
Dragon. But the cool rain kept falling, bathing the floating world of Edo. 


Chapter Nine
Flowers of Edo 

We did it!" said Annie. "We made our own magic!" 
"Yeah, we got the Cloud Dragon to put out the fire," breathed Jack. He 
felt dazed. "Do you think we're near Basho's house?" 
"I think so," said Annie. "We asked the Cloud Dragon to take us there, so 
I bet she did. Come on, let's find Basho." 
Jack and Annie stood up and started walking along the edge of the river. 
They walked barefoot through the mud, under dripping trees. 
"Hey, there's the clearing," said Annie. 
Jack and Annie headed toward the clearing beyond the trees and tall 
grass. 
no!" cried Annie. "Look!" 
In the clearing, rain was falling on the charred ruins of Basho's house. 
The shingled roof and the bamboo walls of the little hut had burned and 
collapsed. 
"Where's Basho?" said Jack scared. 
"There!" said Annie. 
The famous poet sat on a log next to his banana tree in the gray rain. His 
clothes were blackened. His face was covered with soot. He clutched his 
writing box. 
"Basho!" yelled Annie. 
Basho looked up. A smile crossed his dirty, weathered face. "I looked for 
you by the river, but didn't see you!" he said. "I am glad you are safe." 
"We're glad you're safe, too," said Jack. 
"But your castle! Your castle burned down," said Annie. 
"Yes. It burned before the miracle of the rain," said Basho, sighing. 
Jack and Annie sat on the log next to him. Through the smoky drizzle 
they all stared at the rubble. Trees and plants dripped with rain. A pigeon 
cooed. 
For a long moment, no one spoke. Then Annie broke the silence. "I'm 
glad you still have your banana tree," she said. "I like the sound of the rain 
falling on the leaves." 
Basho looked up, but didn't say anything. 
"Yeah, and I like the sound of the river," said Jack. "It's louder now since 
the rain came." 
Basho tilted his head as if listening to the rain on the leaves of the 
banana plant and to the steady rushing sounds of the river. His face 
softened. "Yes, I like those things, too," he said. He held up his wooden 
box. "And I still have my poems."
"Don't worry, Basho," said Annie. "Everything can be built again. 
"And your castle will be even more beautiful than before," said Jack. 
Basho smiled. "I suppose that is why the ancients called our fires "the 
flowers of Edo,"" he said. 
"What do you mean?" asked Jack. 
"After something is destroyed by fire, a good new thing often takes its 
place," said Basho. "Just as after the bleakest winter, beautiful flowers 
return with the spring." 
"I'm sure you'll make many beautiful flowers," said Annie. 
"Thank you," said Basho. "I am sorry, though, that you and Jack will not 
have a place to stay now." 
"Don't worry," said Annie. "We have to travel back to our own house." 
"How far away is that?" asked Basho. 
"Very far," said Annie. She and Jack stood up. "But we just need to get 
back to the Imperial Garden. We'll know the way from there. 
"Good," said Basho. He stood up. "Come, I will accompany you back to 
the garden. 
"Thanks, that would be great!" said Jack. 
Basho picked up his walking stick. Then he led Jack and Annie along the 
bank of the river. Through the light drizzle, they saw a ferryboat moving 
upstream. Basho waved, and the pilot steered the boat to shore. 
Jack and Annie followed Basho onto the ferry. The three of them sat 
together on a wooden bench. The other passengers stared at them. Many 
had ashes on their clothes and soot on their faces. Jack was relieved to see 
that no samurai were on board. 
"Greetings, Master Basho," the pilot said. The other passengers nodded 
respectfully to Basho. They smiled as if the presence of the great poet gave 
them hope. 
"The rains were a miracle, were they not, Master Basho?" an old woman 
said. 
"Indeed they were," said Basho. 
"I guess the Cloud Dragon showed up just in time," said Annie. 
"Annie, " whispered Jack. 
Basho smiled at her. "I am afraid no one believes in the Cloud Dragon 
anymore, Annie," he said. "But it is lovely to pretend, is it not?" 
"Yes, it is lovely," said Annie. 
The rain stopped as the ferryboat traveled on up the river. Mist rose 
from the water, and birds began to sing. 
when they passed the teahouses, Jack and Annie saw firefighters 
cleaning up after the fire, sweeping up broken tiles and scrubbing the 
walkways. Waiters were bringing them tea. 
The sun was shining by the time they passed the puppet stage and the 
charred lumberyard. Wisps of smoke still rose from the black piles of 
burned logs. 
The ferryboat floated on through the bright morning. It glided under the 
Great Bridge and past the crowded fish market. Fishermen were hauling in 
their catch from the night before. 
By the time they moved past the samurai castles and came near the 
moat of the Imperial Garden, the sun had completely dried out Jack's and 
Annie's kimonos. 
The boat pulled up to the landing. Basho helped Jack and Annie onto 
the dock. He waved good-bye to the boat passengers. 
Jack, Annie, and Basho walked over the stone bridge that crossed the 
moat. They walked through the massive gate in the high wall. Then they 
followed the paths of the Imperial Garden, around the big rocks and the 
pond with the swans. 
Jack kept an eye out for horses and samurai warriors. But the garden 
was as peaceful as when they had first landed. It was filled with birdsong. 
The willows swayed. Water from the waterfall tumbled into the green pool. 
Jack caught sight of the sun shining on the tree house high in the cherry 
tree. 
Jack stopped walking. "We know our way home from here," he said to 
Basho. 
"Are you certain?" asked Basho. He did not seem to notice the tree 
house in the cherry tree. 
"We're sure," said Annie. "Once we start on our way, the trip will be 
easy." 
Basho nodded. "You remind me of the famous saying of the samurai 
Musashi," he said. "A journey of a thousand miles begins with one step."
"I've heard that saying before," said Jack. 
"Words can outlive their creators," said Basho. "Though I will never be 
so lucky as to have mine outlive me." 
"Don't be too sure of that," said Annie. 
Basho gave them a little smile. "I hope you both will return to Edo 
someday," he said. "Look for me when you come back. I should have a 
lovely new castle on the river by then." 
"Thanks," said Jack. 
"Good-bye," said Annie. 
They both bowed to Basho. 
Basho bowed to them. Then the great poet turned and left them. Falling 
cherry blossoms floated on the wind as he walked away. 
Jack and Annie watched Basho until they could no longer see him. Then 
they turned to go. Just as they started walking, a man stepped out from 
the shadows of the garden. The man wore a blue coat and two swords 
hung from his belt. 
"Excuse me," said the samurai. "May I see your passports, please?" 

Chapter Ten 
Journey of a Thousand Miles 

Jack couldn't speak. 
"Our passports?" said Annie. "They they got destroyed in a fire 
on the other side of the Great Bridge." 
The samurai narrowed his eyes. "Your passports burned?." he said. 
"Why were you on the other side of the Great Bridge?" 
"We were with Master Basho," said Jack. 
"Master Basho?" said the samurai. 
"Yes," said Annie. "We are students of his." 
 The samurai's expression brightened. "So you study poetry with 
Master Basho?" 
"Yes," said Annie. "Would you like to hear some poems?" 
 no! thought Jack. Not again! 
"Yes, please," said the samurai. 
"No problem." Annie thought for a moment and then said: 
"Here's a simple little poem." She recited: 
Rain falls outside, 
But the tiny cricket on the hearth 
Is dry tonight. 
The samurai nodded. he said. "Yes. Very simple, but very 
lovely." 
"Thank you," said Annie. 
The man turned to Jack. Jack could hardly breathe. His mind was blank. 
He looked to Annie for help. But Annie just smiled, waiting to hear his 
poem. 
Jack cleared his throat. He tried to stay calm. He closed his eyes and let 
his mind roam over their visit to Japan. He opened his eyes. He looked up 
at the cloudless sky and said: 
The sun is shining, 
The day is hot. 
But moonlight 
And cool breezes 
Still fill my heart, 
Left over from last night. 
whispered Annie. "Good!" 
"Yes, very good!" said the samurai. He looked at the sky. "The 
moonlight, the cool breeze," he mused "left over from the night. Very 
good. Master Basho has taught you well!" 
The samurai strolled away, shaking his head and murmuring to himself. 
He let out a happy laugh, as if delighted with the day. 
Jack couldn't believe it. They were free! "Hurry let's go," he said. 
"Before someone else sees us!" 
Jack and Annie ran to the rope ladder and started up. As soon as they 
climbed inside the tree house, Jack grabbed the Pennsylvania book. He 
found a picture of the Frog Creek woods. "As the famous samurai once 
said, “A journey of a thousand miles begins with one step,”" said Jack. 
"Or one sentence," said Annie. 
"Right," said Jack. He pointed at the picture. "I wish we could go home." 
Annie gasped. "Wait a minute!" she said. "We forgot our mission!" 
"What?" said Jack. 
But the wind started to blow. 
The tree house started to spin. 
It spun faster and faster. 
Then everything was still. 
Absolutely still. 
The early-morning air was cold. 
Jack and Annie were back in Frog Creek, wearing their own clothes. 
Jack's burlap bag was a backpack again. He looked inside to make sure the 
Wand of Dianthus was there. It was. And Basho's frog poem was there, 
too. 
"I can't believe it!" said Annie. "We didn't look for a secret of happiness 
for Merlin. How could we forget that?" 
man," said Jack. "We were so busy worrying about the samurai and 
putting out the fire that we forgot our mission. " 
"What will Morgan say?" said Annie. "We've never forgotten a mission 
before! And this one was the most important we've ever had! To help save 
Merlin!" Annie was near tears. 
"Wait, wait. Calm down," said Jack. "Let's think a minute. Maybe we 
actually found a secret of happiness. Maybe we just don't know we found 
it." 
"You mean, like were we extra happy at any time?" asked Annie. 
"Yeah, sort of," said Jack. "Were we?" 
"I don't know, were you?" said Annie. 
"I think a few times ..., " said Jack. 
"Like when?" said Annie. 
"Like when we were crossing the Great Bridge with Basho, I felt sort of 
happy then," said Jack. 
"Me too," said Annie. "And I was pretty happy eating sushi." 
"Yeah, but I got scared when I saw the samurai watching me," said Jack. 
"What about the sumo-wrestling match?" asked Annie. 
"That was fun," said Jack. "But I don't know if it really made me happy. 
"Riding the dragon and putting out the fire?" said Annie. 
"That was great," said Jack. "But I was too worried about saving the city 
to be happy." 
"Making up poems for the samurai?" said Annie. 
"Too nervous," said Jack. 
"Well, when were you purely happy?" said Annie. 
"I think it was when ..." 
Jack stopped. He felt silly saying what he was about to say. 
"Go ahead," said Annie. 
"I think it was when I was lying on the mat in Basho's house," said Jack, 
"and I touched that little patch of moonlight on the floor and I listened to 
the banana leaves in the wind. 
"yes!" said Annie. "Before we fell asleep, and I heard the cricket and 
I felt like I was a cricket myself going to sleep in a cozy place." 
"Yeah, like that," said Jack. 
"It's like what Basho said about finding beauty in the small things of 
nature," said Annie, "like his poem about that frog splashing in the water." 
"I think that's it!" said Jack. "A secret of happiness is paying really close 
attention to the small things in nature." 
"Wow," said Annie. "I think that's a great secret to share with Merlin." 
"It is," said Jack, "and Basho's poem will help Merlin understand." 
"Right," said Annie. 
"Let's go," said Jack. 
Annie climbed down the rope ladder. Jack put his pack on his back and 
followed her. 
As Jack and Annie started through the chilly woods together, Jack 
noticed things he hadn't seen before. He saw tiny blue wild-flowers 
sprouting up from the winter-weary ground. 
He saw fresh anthills in the dirt. 
He saw leaf buds on twigs and green moss on a rock, bright in the March 
sunlight. 
"I feel like I'm seeing spring for the first time," said Jack. 
"Me too," said Annie. 
"Not just for the first time this year," said Jack. "But for the first time in 
my whole life. 
"Me too," said Annie. 
Jack felt happy, really happy, as he and Annie headed for home in the 
sparkling morning light. 

More About Basho, Edo, and Haiku

The poet Basho was born in Japan in 1644. His family wanted him 
to grow up to be a samurai. But when he was a young man, he decided to 
write poetry instead. 
Basho was poor and unknown for many years. Gradually, though, 
people started to read his poetry and, over time, he became very famous! 
His poetry fans built him a small house near the river Sumida. A student 
gave him a banana tree—basho, in Japanese—to plant in his yard. In 1682 
Basho's house was destroyed by a fire that swept through Edo. (Edo was 
often in danger from fires because the buildings were made of wood. As 
mentioned in this story, a terrible fire in 1657 had burned nearly all the 
city!) 

A new house was built for Basho, but he did not live there for long. In 
1684, he began the first of his journeys around Japan. Basho even wrote a 
book about his travels called The Narrow Road to the Deep North, in 
which he combined journal writing and poetry. 

The form of poetry that Basho is famous for is called haiku (say  It is the shortest
 form of Japanese poetry. Haiku poetry is written in 
plain speech and often describes humble things of everyday life. At first, 
haiku poetry seems very simple, but it can have a deep effect on a reader. 
A good haiku poem can waken your senses and help you see life in a fresh 
way—like it did for Jack, Annie, and the other people in this story.
