a monarch butterfly


A monarch butterfly settles on the leaf of a milkweed plant. She gently 
presses a tiny egg onto one of its leaves. The egg is the beginning of 
another monarch butterfly. egg It is summertime in the north. A breeze stirs the 
stem of the milkweed plant. The monarch egg is white and shiny. It is the size 
of a small dot and sticks to the leaf. When the butterfly lays the egg she 
makes it sticky. Wind and rain cannot make the egg come loose. caterpillar
or larva  In a few days the egg hatches. Out crawls a small Caterpillar also 
called a larva. First the caterpillar eats the eggshell and then chews away at 
the milkweed leaf. The egg of a monarch is almost always laid on a milkweed 
plant. The plant will be its food. molting The caterpillar eats and grows and 
begins to change. It breaks out of its old skin showing a new skin 
underneath. This is called molting. For two weeks the caterpillar eats and 
eats. It molds about five times. Finally it is a full grown monarch 
caterpillar about two inches long. Now something wonderful begins to happen. 
The caterpillar creeps to the stem of a leaf. It attaches itself to the stem 
and drops down head first. The caterpillar's bright colors become greenish. 
chrysalis pupa  Then the skin splits and moves up the 
top. The skin falls off. A new strange form appears. It is called the 
chrysalis or pupa. The chrysalis is like a blanket that is wrapped around the 
body growing inside. At first the chrysalis is long and soft. Then it shrinks 
and hardens and becomes light green decorated with gold dots. Inside the 
monarch butterfly begins to grow. About two weeks later the chrysalis changes 
again. It turns gray green before becoming transparent. Inside are  white dots 
and orange and black lines. The chrysalis wiggles then it splits open the 
butterfly begins to pull itself out the head and legs appear first and then 
the rest of it slides out. abdomen  metamorphosis 
The wings are tiny and stuck together and the butterfly's abdomen is big the 
abdomen becomes smaller when its fluid is pumped into the wings. The wings 
become bigger. A caterpillar has turned into a butterfly. This is called 
metamorphosis. The butterfly sits quietly for a few hours waiting for its 
wings to dry and harden. At last they begin to move slowly and then beat 
faster and faster The butterfly flutters up toward the sky. Monarchs have a 
bad taste and will make a bird or animal sick if they are eaten so most of 
them are left alone. There are many parts to a butterfly. The monarch 
butterfly only flies during the day when it rains the butterfly stays dry 
hidden under leaves. Fall is on the way. Soon it will be cold. If the monarch 
butterfly doesn't  fly south it will die. Once again it darts up into the sky.
The butterfly will take a long trip to a warmer place. This is called 
migration. The monarch will fly to where its ancestors have always gone 
sometimes to the very same tree other monarchs keep appearing making a 
cloud of orange in the sky at night they rest in trees. Sometimes they fly up 
to miles an hour and almost miles in one day. There could be over butterflies 
traveling together. They fly to places such as Florida southern California 
and Mexico. Some butterflies migrate miles. They will stay south throughout 
the winter. Some towns and cities are proud to have the butterflies visit 
them. They have festivals to celebrate their arrival. Children dress up for 
parades and butterfly costumes. Sometimes there's a band and visitors come 
from all around. Monarchs can cluster together thousands of them clinging to 
one tree a butterfly tree in the spring these butterflies migrate north again 
to the fields of milkweed plants.  how to raise a monarch butterfly
how to make a home for your monarch Caterpillar. Find a big clean glass jar 
with a metal lid. Pound several holes in the lid with a hammer and nail so 
air can get inside the jar. how to find your monarch Caterpillar. Late July 
and August is the best time to find a monarch Caterpillar. Go to a field where 
milkweed plants grow. Look underneath the milkweed leaves.  When you find a 
monarch Caterpillar pick it up gently. How to care for your monarch 
Caterpillar. Pick four or five leaves  off the milkweed plants and drop them 
into the jar for the Caterpillar to eat. Then carefully put the Caterpillar 
into the jar and put the lid on. don't set the jar in a sunny place. Each day 
have someone watch the Caterpillar while you clean its Home. Replace the old 
milkweed leaves with new ones. Then put the Caterpillar back inside the jar. 
Your caterpillar will change into a Chrysalis. When the Caterpillar is full 
grown it will hang upside down from the lid of the jar shed its skin and form 
its Chrysalis. Do not touch the chrysalis. The chrysalis will change into your 
monarch butterfly. In about two weeks you will be able to see through the 
chrysalis. It is time for the monarch butterfly to come out. When it does it 
will need a few hours for its wings to grow and dry. How to release your 
butterfly outside. A monarch butterfly doesn't want to be a pet. Carefully let 
it climb out of the jar onto your finger. When it is ready to go it will fly 
up into the sky. Or you can leave the opened jar outside in a safe place. 
The monarch butterflies that hatch in the spring and early summer only live 
for a few weeks. The ones that hatch in Midsummer are the ones that migrate 
they live eight to nine months. About a hundred million monarchs migrate each 
year. Some monarchs fly as high as feet. A monarch can have a wing spread of 
inches. In Santa Cruz California a monarch butterfly flag is hoisted the day 
the monarchs arrive. It is flown for six months until the last monarch 
butterfly leaves for the north. Pacific Grove California calls itself 
butterfly town . The monarch project has volunteers that tag thousands  of 
butterflies to track how fast and far they fly. In Mexico there are nature 
reserves where the monarch butterflies spend the winter.

the scales of the wings make up the colors
scales
wings
abdomen 

leg
thorax

proboscis

head
the feeler or antenna is for touch and smell
feeler or antenna
the tube to the mouth is called the proboscis 
it sucks up sweet juice called nectar from flowers
canada
united states
mexico
pacific ocean
atlantic ocean 
