mufaro's beautiful daughters
an african tale


A long time ago, in a certain place in Africa, a small village lay across a 
river and half a day's journey from a city where a great king lived. A man 
named Mufaro lived in this village with his two daughters, who were called 
Manyara and Nyasha. Everyone agreed that Manyara and Nyasha were very beautiful.

Manyara was almost always in a bad temper. She teased her sister whenever 
their father's back was turned, and she had been heard to say, "Someday, 
Nyasha, I will be a queen, and you will be a servant in my household."
"If that should come to pass," Nyasha responded, "I will be pleased to serve 
you. But why do you say such things? You are clever and strong and beautiful. 
Why are you so unhappy?"

"Because everyone talks about how kind you are, and they praise everything you 
do," Manyara replied. "I'm certain that Father loves you best. But when I am a 
queen, everyone will know that your silly kindness is only weakness."

Nyasha was sad that Manyara felt this way, but she ignored her sister's words 
and went about her chores. Nyasha kept a small plot of land, on which she grew 
millet, sunflowers, yams, and vegetables. She always sang as she worked, and 
some said it was her singing that made her crops more bountiful than anyone 
else's. 

One day, Nyasha noticed a small garden snake resting beneath a yam vine. 
"Good day, little Nyoka," she called to him. "You are welcome here. You will 
keep away any creatures who might spoil my vegetables." She bent forward, gave 
the little snake a loving pat on the head, and then returned to her work. 
From that day on, Nyoka was always at Nyasha's side when she tended her 
garden. it was said that she sang all the more sweetly when he was there. 

Mufaro knew nothing of how Manyara treated Nyasha. Nyasha was too considerate 
of her father's feelings to complain, and manyara was always careful to behave 
herself when Mufaro was around. Early one morning, a messenger from the city 
arrived. The Great King wanted a wife. "The Most Worthy and Beautiful 
Daughters in the Land are invited to appear before the King, and he will 
choose one to become Queen!" the messenger proclaimed. Mufaro called Manyara 
and Nyasha to him. "It would be a great honour to have one of you chosen," 
he said. "Prepare yourselves to journey to the city. I will call together all our 
friends to make a wedding party. We will leave tomorrow as the sun rises."
"But, my father," Manyara said sweetly, "it would be painful for either of us to 
leave you, even to be wife to the king. I know Nyasha would grieve to death if she 
were parted from you. I am strong. Send me to the city, and let poor Nyasha be 
happy here with you." Mufaro beamed with pride. "The king has asked for the most 
worthy and the most beautiful. No, Manyara, I cannot send you alone. Only a king 
can choose between two such worthy daughters. Both of you must go!"

That night,  when everyone was asleep, Manyara stole quietly out of the village. 
She had never been in the forest at night before, and she was frightened,  but her 
greed to be the 
first to appear before the king drove her on. In her hurry, she almost stumbled 
over a small boy who suddenly appeared, standing in the path. "Please," said the 
boy. "I am hungry.
Will you give me something to eat?" "I have brought only enough for myself," 
Manyara replied. "But, please!" said the boy. "I am so very hungry." "Out of my 
way,  boy! Tomorrow
I will become your queen. How dare you stand in my path?"

After traveling for what seemed like a great distance, Manyara came to a small 
clearing. There, silhouetted against the moonlight, was an old woman seated on a 
large stone. The old
woman spoke. "I will give you some advice, Manyara. Soon after you pass the place 
where two paths cross, you will see a grove of trees. They will laugh at you. 
You must not laugh 
in return. Later, you will meet a man with his head under his arm. You must be 
polite to him." "How do you know my name? How dare you advise your future queen? 
Stand aside, you 
ugly old woman!" Manyara scolded, and the rushed on her way without looking back.

Just as the woman had foretold,  Manyara came to a grove of trees, and they did 
indeed seem to be laughing at her. "I must be calm," Manyara thought. "I will not 
be frightened." She
looked up at the trees and laughed out loud. "I laugh at you, trees!" she shouted, 
and she hurried on. It was not yet dawn when Manyara heard the sound of rushing 
water. "The river 
must be up ahead," she thought.  "The great city is just on the other side." But 
there, on the rise she saw a man with his head tucked under his arm. Manyara ran 
past him without 
speaking. "A queen acknowledges only those who please her," she said to herself. 
"I will be queen. I will be queen," she chanted, as she hurried on toward the city. 

Nyasha woke at the first light of dawn. As she put on her finest garments, she 
thought how her life might be changed forever beyond this day. "I'd much prefer to 
live here," she 
admitted to herself. "I'd hate to leave this village and never see my father or 
sing to little Nyoka again." Her thoughts were interrupted by loud shouts and a 
commotion from the 
wedding party assembled outside. Manyara was missing! Everyone bustled about, 
searching and calling for her. When they found her footprints on the path that led 
to the city, they
decided to go on as planned. As the wedding party moved through the forst, brightly 
plumed birds darted about in the cool green shadows beneath the trees. Though 
anxious about her 
sister, Nyasha was soon filled with excitement about all there was to see.

They were deep in the forest when she saw the small boy standing by the side of the 
path. "You must be hungry," she said, and handed him a yam she had brought for her 
lunch. The boy
smiled and disappeared as quietly as he had come. Later, as they were approaching 
the place there the two paths crossed, the old woman appeared and silently pointed 
the way to the 
city. Nyasha thanked her and gave her a small pouch filled with sunflower seeds. 
The sun was high in the sky when the party came to the grove of towering trees. 
Their uppermost branches
seemed to bow down to Nyasha as she passed beneath them. At last, someone announced 
that they were near their destination. 

Nyasha ran ahead and topped the rise before the others could catch up with her. 
She stood transfixed at her first sight of the city. "Oh, my father," she called.  
"A great spirit must
stand guard here! Just look at what lies before us. I never in all my life dreamed 
there could be anything so beautiful!"

Arm in arm, Nyasha and her father descended the hill, crossed the river, and 
approached the city gate. Just as they entered through the great doors, the air was 
rent by piercing cries,
and Manyara ran wildly out of a chamber at the center of the enclosure. When she 
saw Nyasha, she fell upon her, sobbing. "Do not go to the king, my sister. Oh, 
please, Father, do not
let her go!" she cried hysterically. "There's a great monster there, a snake with 
five heads! He said he knew all my faults and that I displeased him. He would have 
swallowed me alive 
if I had not run. Oh, my sister, please do not go inside that place." It frightened 
Nyasha to see her sister so upset. But, leaving her father to comfort Manyara, she 
bravely made her
way to the chamber and opened the door.

On the seat of the great chief's stool lay the little garden snake. Nyasha laughed 
with relief and joy. "My little friend!" she exclaimed. "It's such a pleasure to 
see you, but why
are you here?" "I am the king," Nyoka replied. And there, before Nyasha's eyes, 
the garden snake changed shape.

"I am the king. I am also the hungry boy with whom you shared a yam in the forest 
and the old woman whom you made a gift of sunflower seeds. But you know me best as 
Nyoka. Because I
have been all of these, I know you to be the Most Worthy and Most Beautiful 
Daughter in the Land. It would make me very happy if you would be my wife."

And so it was that, a long time ago, Nyasha agreed to be married. The king's mother 
and sisters took Nyasha to their house, and the wedding preparations began. The 
best weavers in the
land laid out their finest cloth for her wedding garments. Villagers from all 
around were invited to the celebration, and a great feast from millet that had been 
brought from her 
village. Mufaro proclaimed to all who would hear him that he was the happiest 
father in all the land, for he was blessed with two beautiful and worthy daughters- 
Nyasha, the queen; 
and Manyara, a servant in the queen's household. 




































