my amazing body
a first look at health and fitness


You have an amazing body. So do all the other people in the world. 
You have a brain that can do more complicated thinking than any computer. 
You have a body that can move in more different ways than any robot. 
You have five senses sight hearing taste touch and smell. 
That tell you lots of important things about the world around you without you even having to ask. 

Your body can do lots of other things on its own too. Your heart beats your lungs breathe and when you graze your knee or 
get a cold your body can make you well again without you having to tell you it to. 

But your body cannot do everything on its own. It needs some help from you. There are lots of ways you can help your body 
stay fit and healthy. All of them are easy and most of them are fun as well. 

what about you how many different things can you think of that help keep your body healthy
how often do you do these things

Food contains vitamins minerals and energy these things help you to think and play and grow. 
When you eat fresh fruits and vegetables and protein foods like meat milk and beans you are giving your body the things 
it needs to grow. But when you eat lots of sweets chips and soft drinks you are not giving your body the vitamins it needs. 
These foods and drinks may taste nice but if you have them too often your body may become sick. 
It is ok to eat these foods sometimes. But the best way to stay healthy is to eat lots of different kinds of foods every day. 
Another way to help your body is to use it in every way you can. That means getting lots of exercise. 
Exercise helps your muscles stay strong and fit and helps your bones grow. 
When you are running and jumping and stretching you are exercising your heart and helping it to pump blood 
all over your body. You are also exercising your lungs helping them to breathe in more air. 

what about you
do you like to run and jump around what are your favorite types of exercises how often do you get to do these things

There are other good ways to help your body stay healthy. 
When you bathe and brush your teeth you are helping keep yourself clean and free from germs. 
And while exercising is good, resting is important too. We all need plenty of sleep and to have times when we can 
work or play quietly. 

Your body is always giving you clues about what it needs. When your body needs rest you feel tired. 
When your body needs food you feel hungry. And when your body has had enough food you feel full. 
When you feel a pain it is a message that a part of you needs care and attention it's important to listen to the 
messages your body is sending you. Even healthy people get ill sometimes. It's never fun to get sick but when you are sick 
your body is doing something amazing. It is making a memory of that illness so that next time you can get better more quickly. 
You only have one body and it is the most important thing you will ever own. 
Your body is built to last you a long time and if you take really good care of it it will.
