paul bunyan a tall tale retold and illustrated


Paul Bunyan was the largest, smartest, and strongest baby ever born in the state of 
Maine.

Even before he learned to talk, Paul showed an interest in the family logging business.
He took the lumber wagon and wandered through the neighborhood collecting trees.
trespassers will not be tolerated this orchard is the property of miss anna and miss hannah screach
trespassers will not be tolerated this orchard is the property of miss anna and miss hannah screach
peter bunyan logs and lumber
peter bunyan logs and lumber

There were so many complaints about Paul's visits that his parents anchored his cradle
in harbor.

All was well until Paul started rocking the cradle and stirring up waves. After his
parents had paid for the damage, they decided to move to the backwoods where life 
would be more peaceful.

Paul loved his new wilderness home. he soon grew into a sturdy lad who was so quick on
his feet he could blow out a candle and leap into bed before the room became dark.
Every day he joined his forest friends in their sports. He raced with the deer and 
wrestled with the grizzlies.

One morning Paul awoke to find the world under a blanket of blue snow. he heard a 
moan from inside a snowdrift, and there he found a shivering ox calf. Paul adopted him
and named him Babe. Both Paul and Babe began growing at an astonishing rate, but the 
ox never lost the color of the snow from which he'd been rescued.

As the years passed, the two of them proved to be extremely helpful in the family 
business. peter bunyan and son log

At seventeen, Paul grew a fine beard, which he combed with the top of a pine tree. By
this time other settlers were beginning to crowd into the Maine woods. Paul felt an 
urge to move on. He said good-bye to his parents and headed west. the screach sisters orchard

Paul wanted to cross the country with the best lumbering crew available. He hired Ole,
a celebrated blacksmith, and two famous cooks, Sourdough Slim and Creampuff Fatty. 
Then he signed up legendary lumbermen like Big Tim Burr, Hardjaw Murphy, and the seven
Hackett brothers.

Paul put the camp buildings on wheels so that Babe could haul them from one forest to
another. As soon as he had cleared the land, pioneers moved in to set up farms and 
villages.

On the far slopes of the Appalachian Mountains, several of Paul's men were ambushed
by a gang of underground ogres called  Paul grabbed the camp dinner horn 
and blew a thunderous note into the  cave, determined to blast the meanness
right out of them.

To Paul's dismay, the  responded by snatching the entire crew. A wild, 
rough-and-tumble rumpus began inside the den.

When that historic tussle was over, the  needed six weeks to untangle 
themselves. They disappeared into the depths of the earth, and they've never been
heard from since.

Paul's next job was to clear the heavily forested Midwest. He hired armies of 
extra woodsmen and built enormous new bunkhouses. The men sailed up to bed in
balloons and parachuted down to breakfast in the morning. Unfortunately the cooks
couldn't flip flapjacks fast enough to satisfy all the newcomers. 

To solve the muddle, Paul built a colossal flapjack griddle. The surface was greased
by kitchen helpers with slabs of bacon laced to their feet.
blast off
pour the batter
stop the game
grease the griddle
mops forever
bash the brooms
maul the mops
i'm bored
mop them off the map
mops  boom boom broom
brooms
brooms
minnesota mops 
boston brooms
flapjack flour
flapjack flour
brooms
brooms 
brooms
brooms 
brooms

mops
mops
mops
mops
mops

Every time the hot griddle was flooded with batter, it blasted a delicious flapjack
high above the clouds. Usually the flapjacks landed neatly beside the griddle, but
sometimes they were a bit off target.

Paul took a few days off to dig the St. Lawrence River and the Great Lakes so that
barges of Vermont maple syrup could be brought to camp.

Fueled by the powerful mixture of flapjacks and syrup, the men leveled the Great 
Plains and shaved the slopes of the Rocky Mountains.

They probably would have sawed the peaks themselves into logs if a blizzard hadn't
suddenly buried the entire mountain range. 

That blizzard continued for several years, snuffing out the springs, summers, and
autumns. The crew burrowed into their bunkhouses and hibernated.

Babe became so depressed that Paul asked Ole to make a pair of sunglasses for his
friend. When Babe saw the world colored green, he thought he'd stumbled into a field
of clover. He began eating the snow with such gusto that soon the treetops reappeared.

At that point, all those pent-up springtimes simply exploded, dissolving the storm
clouds and the remaining snow. 

Paul and his friends invited some newly arrived settlers to join them in a celebration
of all the holidays that had been missed.

After the festival the lumberjacks continued their journey. But, as they headed 
southwest, the blistering sun and the giant Texas varmints proved to be more of a 
problem than they had expected. 

Travel became so difficult that some of the men began to speak longingly of being
buried by a blizzard or bear hugged by a

while crossing arizona the griddle curled up
like a burned leaf and the batter evaporated deprived
of their flapjacks
the lumbermen became weak and discouraged

Paul's great ax fell from his shoulder, gouging a jagged trench, which today is known
as the Grand Canyon.

Disaster seemed certain until Paul came up with a desperate plan. He headed east and
found a family that could sell him a barn filled with corn.  Babe galloped it back 
across the desert. When the flaming sunrise hit that barn it exploded, and the 
lumbermen awoke to find themselves in a raging blizzard of popcorn. Dizzy with joy,
they pulled on their mittens and began blasting each other with popcorn balls.

A westerly wind kept the cooling clouds of popcorn swirling around Paul and his crew
until they crossed California and reached the Pacific Ocean. 

After he had crossed the country, some say that Paul gave up lumbering and rambled 
north searching for new areas of untouched wilderness. With the passing years, Paul
has been seen less frequently. However, along with his unusual size and strength, he
seems to possess an extraordinary longevity. Sometimes his great bursts of laughter
can be heard rumbling like distant thunder across the wild Alaskan mountain ranges
where he and Babe still roam.


paul and babe head north toward alaska land cleared by paul bunyan and babe
paul's maple syrup canal now known as the great lakes the  den paul's boyhood home
maine young paul at play with his friends
texas
arizona
california
paul's trench now known as the grand canyon
the popcorn blizzard 