pecos bill
a tall tale retold and illustrated


Back in the rugged pioneer days when Pecos Bill was a baby, his kinfolk decided that 
New England was becoming entirely too crowded, so they piled into covered wagons and
headed west. The clan considered settling in Eat Texas, until Bill's ma noticed a
homesteader putting up a shack about fifty miles away. "Another crowded neighborhood,"
she grumbled. "Let's push on."

As they crossed the Pecos River, Bill threw out a fishing line. But when a Texas trout
nibbled, Bill was yanked overboard. 

He was towed far downstream, and he would've drowned for sure if an old coyote hadn't
grabbed him. Her family adopted Bill and taught him the ways of wild creatures.

By the time Bill had outgrown his breeches, he felt like a member of the pack. 

He loved to romp with his coyote brothers, and as he grew older, he sometimes played
with the bighorn sheep.

One day a drifter named Chuck stumbled across Bill while he was taking a nap. He asked
Bill what he meant by snoozing in the brush without his trousers. Bill tried to 
explain that he was a coyote.

"Horse feathers!" said Chuck. "You're a Texan, just like me." Bill decided to give life
as a Texan a try. He borrowed Chuck's extra clothes and peppered him with questions.

"To tell you the truth," said Chuck, "most Texans are flea-bitten outlaws, and the 
worst of them are the Hell's Gulch Gang. But even they would be okay if they'd become
ranchers and herd the longhorns that wander hereabouts." Ranching sounded good to
Bill, and he headed for Hell's Gulch, determined to recruit the Gang. 

But Bill's plans were interrupted when he was ambushed by a giant rattlesnake.

When Bill dodged the snake's fangs, it slapped its coils around him. The snake 
squeezed hard,  but Bill squeezed harder and he didn't let up until every drop
of poison was out of that reptile, leaving it skinny as a rope and mild as a goldfish.

Then, before Bill could catch his breath, he was tackled by a critter that was part
grizzly, part puma, part gorilla, and part tarantula. They wrestled up and down the
canyon and kicked up quite a dust storm before the monster finally became so dizzy
it had to quit.

No one had ever tangled with those two varmints and lived to tell the tale, so when
Bill met up with the Hell's Gulch Gang they were thunderstruck. "Who's the boss of 
this outfit?" Bill asked. "I was," mumbled Gun Smith, "but now you is." Bill told
the gang that he was going to turn every last one of them into respectable ranch
hands. But the men claimed that Texas cattle were much too ornery to ever put up
with ranching.

Bill had sudden inspiration, and he approached a longhorn that was sulking nearby.
Just as the bull whirled around to trample him, Bill snagged him with the rattlesnake
and yanked with all his might. "Cattle roping has just been invented!"

Bill scared that bull out of its skin with a blood-curdling coyote howl. The 
embarrassed creature hightailed it off to grow a new coat, while Bill cut the hide
into strips and passed them out to the men to use a lassos.

The cowboys and cattle tangled in a rough and tumble that is remembered
to this day as the first western rodeo.

When it ended, the Gang declared they would be cowboys forever, and they promised to
help Bill round up every steer in Texas.

Bill needed a horse to ride on the big roundup. "Well," said Chuck, "there's a wild
stallion in the mountains that some folks call lightening others think the name
widow maker suits him better . But no matter what you call 
him, he's the fastest, most beautiful horse in the world."

Bill went off in search of Lighting. As soon as he saw him, Bill knew he'd found the
horse for him.

Bill chased Lighting north to the Arctic Circle... and south to the bottom of the 
Grand Canyon.

Finally he cornered the stallion and jumped onto his back. Lightning exploded from
the canyon, leaping and bucking across three states.

Then Bill began to sing in the language he had learned from his coyote family. He 
sang of his admiration for the stallion's strength and promised him a lifetime of
partnership and devotion.

When Bill was done singing, he offered the horse his freedom, but Lightning chose
to follow him forever.

With Pecos Bill and Lightning leading them, the cowboys whooped across the state
of Texas, rounding up every last steer. But their high spirits collapsed when they 
were faced with the job of driving that enormous herd back and forth between the
summer and winter ranges. To silence their grumbling, Bill set up the Perpetual 
Motion Ranch on Pinnacle Peak, which was so high that the top remained in winter
while spring and autumn turned into summer at the base.

A team of prairie dogs helped Bill to fence off the mountain so that the cattle
could wander through the seasons unattended. Bill's plan worked fine except that
Pinnacle Peak was so steep the steers fell right off whenever there was a breeze. 
The men had to work harder than ever carrying the cattle back up the hill. 

Bill solved that problem by inventing steers with very short legs on one side of 
their bodies. Even in a windstorm these cattle could stand securely on the slope as
long as they kept their short-legged sides uphill.

Now the men at Perpetual Motion Ranch had all kinds of free time, and Bill became 
known as the world's greatest cowboy. 

But the high point of Bill's life came when Slewfoot Sue passed by on the back of
a catfish. Bill was instantly in love and he hollered a proposal of marriage. Sue 
agreed, on two conditions: first, Bill had to buy her a wedding dress with a bustle,
and second, he had to let her ride Lightning to the ceremony.

The first request was easy. Bill galloped to Dallas and brought back the fanciest
bustled dress in the city. Sue's second request was not so simple.

Although Slewfoot Sue was a first-rate rider, the moment her bustle touched the 
saddle she was blasted skyward.

Sue soared around the moon and began the long descent to earth. 

She landed squarely on her bustle, but quick as Bill was, he couldn't get to her 
before she bounced back into outer space. Time and time again, Sue hit the ground
and rocketed back toward the stars.

Sue probably would have sailed back and forth forever if Bill hadn't lassoed a 
tornado to help him catch his bouncing bride.

The pair of them clung to that careening storm until it blew itself out over 
California. To Bill's amazement, he and Sue landed on top of his ma and pa's wagon.

Bill couldn't believe his kinfolk were still searching for a home site. He told them 
they could spend the rest of their days roaming but they'd never find a place to equal
Texas. Everyone returned to Bill's ranch for a wingding of a family reunion. And 
today their descendants are still there, happily herding cattle.


bill chases lightning toward the arctic circle
the adventures of pecos bill
pinnacle peak
california
bill and sue slewfoot
ride a tornado to california
the first rodeo
texas
bill and his kinfolk heading west
new england
