Poison Dart Frogs Up Close

Frog Homes
Poison dart frogs like warm, wet places. Some live high in trees in the rain 
forest. Others live near streams or rivers. These frogs are not very big. Some are
as small as your thumbnail. 

Parts of a Poison Dart Frog
leg  eye  head  mouth  toes 
Poison dart frogs live these shaded areas of South and Central America 

Frog Skin
The skin of most poison dart frogs is bright and colorful. Some frogs are red or
purple. Others are yellow, blue, or green. The bright skin warns enemies to stay
away!

Frog Poison
up close
ruby poison dart frog
The slime on the frog's skin is a poison. People in the rain forest dip their 
darts into the slime. Then they use the poison to kill animals for food. This is
how the frogs get their name. 
The golden poison dart frog is the most poisonous of all poison dart frogs.

Frog Vocal Sac
up close
Phantasmal poison frog
A male poison dart frog pushes air into his vocal sac. The sac blows up like a 
balloon. When the air comes out, the sound is very loud.  The call of a dart frog 
sounds like a buzz or chirp.
strawberry poison-dart frog

Frog Legs
up close
green and black poison dart frog
A frog's back legs are longer than its front legs. The back legs fold up when the 
frog is sitting. They shoot straight out when the frog jumps. Poison dart frogs
do not jump very far. 
Amazonian dart-poison frog

Frog Toes
up close
dyeing black poison dart frog
Poison dart frogs crawl around on the forest floor. Sometimes they climb into
the trees. The bottoms of their toes are sticky. The sticky toes keep the frog from
falling.
Rio Madeira poison frog

Frog Eggs 
up close
A female poison dart frog lays 5 to 40 eggs at a time. She lays the eggs in a little
puddle of water. Mother and father frogs stay near the eggs. In about two weeks, 
tiny tadpoles break out of the eggs.
Phantasmal poison frog with eggs

Frog Tadpoles
Up Close
One of the parents backs up to the babies. The tadpoles wiggle onto the parent's 
back. Then the frog takes its babies to a pool of water. The tadpoles swim away. 
Red back poison frog

Little Frog
up close
In a few weeks, the tadpole's tail starts to get smaller. Then it grows little legs
and feet. The tadpole starts to look like a frog. The tiny frog leaves the water. 
It hops into the rain forest.
Blue poison dart frogs

Life Cycle
Eggs are laid in water
Tiny tadpoles hatch in about 2 weeks. 
Tadpoles turn into little frogs in 1 to 2 months.
Adult frogs have brightly colored skin.
Green and black poison dart frog


They may look like ants, but jumping spiders are actually mimicking them. Here, 
two ants flank a jumping spider. Lycid beetles are also often mimicked. There are
about 3,000 species of this beetle worldwide. Most smell bad, taste bad, and wear 
warning colors of orange and black. Birds avoid eating them. Batesian mimics of 
lycid beetles include some species of flies, the South American cockroach, and 
even other beetles. 
Another beetle model is the tiger beetle, which bites with strong jaws. Among its
mimics are the harmless young of the Malaysian katydid, a relative of the 
grasshopper and cricket. Some species of grasshoppers imitate tiger beetles, too. 
Other grasshoppers mimic bombardier beetles, which can spray attackers with a jet 
of boiling hot fluid. Harmless cockroaches mimic ladybugs. One species of cockroach
has wings that curl up so that it looks short and round, like a ladybug. 
Butterflies, the insects that originally inspired the study of mimicry, still 
fascinate scientists with their complex mimic-and-model relationships. The pipevine
swallowtail is a beautiful blue-and-black butterfly with yellow, orange, and white
spots sprinkled on the edges and undersides of its wings. It is found in the 
eastern United States and parts of Mexico. Pipevine swallowtail caterpillars 
feed on poisonous pipevine plants, storing the poison. The adult butterflies taste
bad and are poisonous. A bird that eats a pipevine swallowtail gets sick. The bird
remembers the butterfly's warning colors and avoids it in future. Such birds also 
avoid the pipevine swallowtail's otherwise-tasty mimics: female spicebush 
swallowtails, red-spotted purples, and female Diana fritillaries. 
Another model for Batesian mimics is the common crow butterfly, a black, brown, 
and white bad-tasting butterfly found in Asia. The confused clearwing, a butterfly 
of South America, also tastes bad. It is mimicked by two other species of butterfly,
as well as a moth. One of the most dazzling mimics among butterflies is the African
swallowtail. Females of this species have different colors; they mimic different 
bad-tasting butterflies, depending on where they live. In one area, females are 
orange, black, and white. In another, they are black, yellow, and white. In another
area, they are white and black. There are more than a dozen color combinations in 
this species. 

THE MIMIC OCTOPUS 

The mimic octopus is named for its stunning ability to mimic not one, but at least 
three dangerous animals that share its tropical ocean home. It can strike poses and
change colors to make itself look like a venomous lionfish, a venomous sea snake, 
and a poisonous fish called the banded sole. Like other octopuses, the mimic 
octopus can easily change the shape and color of its rubbery body. Many octopuses 
use these abilities to camouflage themselves, squeeze into hiding places, and 
communicate with one another. The mimic octopus, however, is the first species 
known to imitate dangerous sea creatures to defend itself. 
To imitate the sole, the octopus pulls its eight arms together into a wedge-shaped
bundle and jets forward. This makes it look like a flat-bodied sole rippling through
the water. To mimic a lionfish, the octopus spreads out its arms and lets them 
dangle so that they look like the lionfish's venomous, flared fins. It mimics a sea
snake by changing its brown and white stripes to black and yellow, then tucking 
most of its body and all but two of its arms into a burrow. The two exposed arms 
wriggle and squirm like writhing sea snakes. The mimic's performances have been 
caught on film. Researchers suspect that the octopus may mimic stingrays, jellyfish,
and other sea animals. 

OTHER BATESIAN MIMICS 
Batesian mimicry is common among insects. It is also common in many other 
invertebrates. Some of the most remarkable mimics in this group are nudibranchs. A
nudibranch is a kind of sea slug. Nudibranchs eat algae, anemones, coral polyps, 
and sponges. Some species also eat other nudibranchs. Their colorful meals provide
much of their own color. This helps some species blend in with their surroundings. 
Many nudibranchs store the venomous stings or bad-tasting poisons of their prey and
use them in their own defense. Predators learn that the colors of these nudibranchs
are warning colors. They learn to leave them alone. Other nudibranchs mimic the 
colors of the dangerous nudibranchs, and so do ocean-dwelling flatworms. 
Batesian mimicry also appears in vertebrates. It is particularly widespread in fish.
The common sole, for example, is a European fish with a fin on its back that is 
edged in black. It mimics the weever fish, which has venomous black spines in its 
back fin. Both fish are well camouflaged by color and shape as they hide in mud 
and sand underwater but raise their black- edged fins as a warning when disturbed.
Poisonous flatworms and venomous sea urchins and sea snakes are also mimicked by 
fish. One of the most remarkable fish mimics is a harmless species called the comet, 
which lives on coral reefs of the Indian Ocean and western Pacific Ocean. The comet 
is black with white spots. When threatened by a predator, it dives into a crack in 
the reef, leaving its hind end sticking out. Then the fish raises the fins on its 
tail, back, and underside. This reveals a large black spot surrounded by a white 
ring. Now the comet's hind end looks almost exactly like the head of a whitemouth 
moray eel, a ferocious predator that lurks in crevices on the reef. 
Some reptiles also use mimicry. In southern Africa, a bushveld lizard is camouflaged
when fully grown, but it has black with white spots and a dull red tail when it is
young. This makes the young lizard's small body look like that of an oogpister 
beetle, which sprays a smelly, burning fluid at predators. The little lizard even
walks like a beetle, with its tail held down so that it blends in with the sand. 
Scientists have found lizards in South America that mimic invertebrates, too. One 
species of lizard curls its tail over its back to show its orange underside when it
is bothered. This makes it look like a venomous scorpion. Another kind of South 
American lizard has that look like a poisonous millipede. 
Some caterpillars mimic snakes, as do other snakes. The false cobra of Asia, for 
example, is mildly venomous—its bite is not deadly like a cobra's. But when it is 
bothered, the false cobra rises up, spreads its neck like a hood, and hisses 
loudly, just as the real cobra does. In North America, non-venomous bull snakes 
mimic rattlesnakes. A bull snake does not have a rattle, but if threatened, it will
shake its tail rapidly. This rustles the leaves and grass around it, and can startle
a predator into thinking that it is dealing with a rattlesnake. The most famous 
example of snake mimicry centers on coral snakes. There are about 65 species of
coral snakes found in parts of North, Central, and South America. They are highly 
venomous and clad in warning colors of black and red with yellow or white bands. 
Snakes that share these colors are known as false coral snakes. Some false coral 
snakes are mildly venomous. Others, such as the scarlet king snake, are non-venomous. 
For many years, scientists assumed that the coral snake was the model and the other 
snakes were mimics. However, it may be that the mildly venomous false coral snakes 
are the models. A bite from such a snake would hurt a predator, but not kill it. 
The predator would learn to avoid such snakes in the future. These would create a
population of "educated" predators that have learned to avoid red, yellow, and black
snakes. 

A bite from a deadly coral snake, however, would kill the predator. This would mean
that the coral snake could never "educate" predators to leave it alone. Thus, the 
deadly snake may mimic the less deadly one—it benefits from having the less deadly 
snake educate the predators. The non-venomous mimics benefit, too. 

MIMICRY IN MAMMALS 
Mimicry is not widely found in birds or mammals. Yet, there are a few examples. 
The African porcupine may be a model for a large African rodent called the maned 
rat. The porcupine has sharp, black-and-white quills that are easily seen as it 
moves about at night. Its mimic, the maned rat, is also most active at night. It 
lacks quills, but has a mane of black fur on its back that it can raise so that it 
looks like a porcupine. The rat also may be mimicking another African animal, a 
weasel-like creature called the zorilla. Like the rat, the zorilla is nocturnal. 
It is also black and white and raises its fur when threatened. The zorilla can 
spray terrible-smelling fluid, just like a skunk. The rat cannot spray, but when 
it stiffens its mane, it exposes patches of skin bordered with white. Glands in 
the skin release a strong, foul smell. Few predators tackle either the zorilla or 
the rat. People who live in the maned rat's range believe that the rat's glands 
also produce poison. Scientists don't yet know if this is true. If it is, the rat 
would be considered a Mullerian mimic—a harmful animal that resembles other harmful
animals. 

MULLERIAN MIMICS 
Some of the insects that mimic bad-smelling, inedible lycid beetles are harmless 
Batesian mimics. However, lycid beetles also have mimics that are just as sickening 
to predators. These mimics include bad-tasting beetles and moths as well as stinging
wasps. They are all Mullerian mimics—harmful animals that mimic other harmful 
animals. Mullerian mimics are also called "co-mimics." 
It may seem strange for an animal that has defenses of its own to mimic another 
animal. A stinging wasp and a nauseating moth, both with warning colors, can easily 
educate predators to leave them alone without mimicking a nasty beetle. This kind 
of mimicry, however, may have developed because it benefits the models as well as 
the mimics. They share the task of educating predators, and they also share the
danger of being caught by a predator that has not yet learned to leave them alone. 
The colorful Heliconius butterflies of tropical Central and South America are among 
the best examples of Mullerian mimicry at work. There are more than 40 species of 
Heliconius butterflies. As caterpillars, they feed on the vines of poisonous 
passion plants. Their bodies become poisonous. Later, they grow to be poisonous
butterflies with black, red-orange, and yellowish wings. The butterflies also give 
off strong smells, which may help warn predators that rely on smell more than sight.
Heliconius butterflies of different species resemble each other, so predators that 
learn to avoid one species will then avoid similar-looking butterflies of other 
species. The butterflies employ Mullerian mimicry across the range of places in 
which they live. Butterflies of one Heliconius species in a particular place may 
look different from butterflies of the same species in another place, but their 
co-mimics look different in each place, too. Heliconius butterflies, in turn, are 
mimicked by butterflies that are not related to them. Some of these butterflies may
also be poisonous, but others are not. Some are not butterflies at all, but day-
flying moths. 
Heliconius hecale butterflies may look different in different areas, but their 
co-mimics also look similar in each of those areas. The links among these insects 
are so complex that scientists put them in groups based on colors, not by kinds: 
"tiger," "red," "blue," "orange," and "transparent." These groups are called 
mimicry rings. Species of poisonous burnet moths also wear warning colors in 
different patterns of red, black, yellow, and white. These day-flying moths are
found in much of Europe, Africa, and Asia. Their bodies make a strong acid that's
carried in their blood. Species of burnet moths living in the same area look 
similar to one another. They share their habitat with unrelated poisonous moths 
that look similar, too. Pacific beetle cockroaches are also Mullerian mimics. These
cockroaches spray a foul-smelling fluid from the sides of their bodies at ants and 
other predators. They look and smell like darkling beetles, which tip forward when 
threatened to spray a stinky fluid. They are often called "stink beetles" as a 
result. (A Batesian mimic, the cactus longhorn beetle, copies the darkling beetle's 
behavior but does not have any smelly spray.) 

CATERPILLARS THAT MIMIC SNAKES 
From a predator's point of view, caterpillars are packaged meals—soft-bodied, 
protein-packed morsels. Ants, birds, monkeys, and other animals feed on them. 
Caterpillars have evolved a wide array of defenses to repel them. Snake mimicry is
one of these defenses. Many caterpillars, moths, and butterflies have patches of 
bright color shaped like eyes that can be flashed at a predator. The sudden 
appearance of eyespots can startle a bird or a similar predator long enough to 
delay its attack and give the insect time to escape. Eyespots also help some 
caterpillars pull off a convincing imitation of a snake. The caterpillar of an 
elephant hawk-moth, for example, has a scaly pattern on its body and big eyespots
near its head. When it is threatened, it tucks in its head, which makes its eyespots
bulge. Suddenly, the caterpillar appears to be a watchful snake. Another hawk-moth 
caterpillar found in South America mimics a tree-dwelling viper. It turns into a 
snake by relaxing its grip on a branch and raising its front end. Then it puffs up 
its body just behind its head and turns sideways. These actions make the front of 
the caterpillar look like a triangular snake head, complete with eyes, scales, and 
small pits found on the face of a viper. The caterpillar will even jab at a 
predator as if it were going to bite. 

The tiger swallowtail caterpillar can trick predators with its large eyespots. 
Caterpillars of some swallowtail butterflies also seem to mimic snakes. A 
swallowtail caterpillar's plump front end sports large eyespots that look as if 
they are staring directly at a predator. This visual trick works even if the 
predator moves from one side of the caterpillar to the other or sneaks behind it. 
Some scientists, however, think these caterpillars may be mimicking bad-tasting 
tree frogs instead. 

THE MONARCH BUTTERFLY'S STORY 

Scientists are studying mimicry in many insects and other animals. They are studying
bumblebees, plant-sucking bugs, poison dart frogs, sea slugs, sea cucumbers, and 
flatworms, as well as other butterflies and moths. In recent years, scientists 
found that one of the most common examples of a Batesian model and mimic was wrong.
This pair consists of the monarch butterfly and the viceroy butterfly. The monarch 
is a beautiful orange, black, and white butterfly of North, South, and Central 
America. It feeds on poisonous milkweed plants as a caterpillar. It is unharmed by 
the poison and stores it up in its body to make itself poisonous to predators. This
protection lasts into adulthood. Birds that grab monarchs quickly drop them, or 
throw them up if they have already swallowed them. Studies show that such birds
refuse to eat monarchs or their look-alikes again. 
The monarch and viceroy butterflies are now thought to be part of a 
group of Mullerian mimics—harmful animals that mimic other harmful animals. One of 
the monarch's look-alikes is the viceroy butterfly. For more than 100 years, the 
viceroy was thought to be a Batesian mimic of the monarch: tasty, but avoided by 
birds because of how it looked. In 1991, scientists put an idea to the test. They 
removed the wings from dead butterflies, including some monarchs and viceroys, then
fed the bodies to red-winged blackbirds. The experiment showed that the birds found
the viceroys just as nasty-tasting as the monarchs. 
The viceroy and the monarch are now thought to be part of a group of Mullerian 
mimics that includes the monarch's relatives, the soldier butterfly and the queen
butterfly. 

Fighting Back 
A BULL MOOSE grazing in a field suddenly jerks up his head. He senses that wolves
are nearby. Ears pricked, nostrils flared, he stares in the wolves' direction. 
The wolves stare back. They had quietly stalked the moose for nearly half an hour.
Once they got close, they intended to do what wolves always do when hunting: charge
full speed at the moose. This rush usually made prey run away so the wolves could 
chase it. Not this time. They had lost the advantage of surprise. The alert moose 
had sensed them. He did not run, but stood his ground and continued to return their 
stare. The moose, without moving a muscle, is sending the wolves many signals. By 
standing his ground and looking at them, he warns the predators that they have been 
seen, and that he is more than a match for them. The wolves are aware of this. They
have speed, strength, and sharp fangs, but the moose is also well equipped for 
self-defense. The massive antlers on his head are the least of their worries—a bull
moose mainly uses the antlers to battle other bull moose—but his hard, sharp hooves
are deadly. The wolves know that a powerful kick from a hind hoof or a slashing 
kick from a front hoof could injure or kill one of them. The moose takes a step 
toward the wolves. The wolves turn around and glide back into the woods, giving up 
the hunt. They will search for easier prey. 
Though wolf and moose are hunter and hunted, they are alike in one way: Both species 
defend themselves with body parts that are mainly used for other, non-defensive 
purposes. These body parts did not evolve primarily as weapons for defense. The 
wolf's teeth, for example, are tools for killing prey and eating meat. The moose's 
hooves are for running, and his antlers are for male-to-male combat in mating 
season. Many animals have evolved special body parts used for defense, such as 
stings, but many other animals defend themselves with body parts that have evolved 
for other activities: eating, digging, climbing, and the like. Hunting together, 
the wolves were working as a group, a behavior that prey species also use to their
advantage. Many species that live in herds, flocks, schools, or other groups 
cooperate in defense. This defense may consist of sounding an alarm, posting a 
lookout, or working together to repel a predator. In some insect species, individual
insects even develop into specially formed workers called soldiers. 

TEETH AND TUSKS 
Animals use their teeth mainly for eating. Yet, animals primarily thought of as 
predators—such as lions, wolves, and other large carnivores—have sharp teeth and 
fangs for killing prey and shearing meat from bones. These predators usually have 
strong jaws, too. A hyena's jaws can crush the leg bone of a zebra. Smaller 
predators use their sharp teeth to kill prey. Plant-eating animals, or herbivores, 
have teeth adapted for feeding on plants. Horses' teeth push up slowly out of their 
jawbones during their entire lives. This is to replace the top parts that wear down 
from grazing. A deer has nipping teeth in the front of its lower jaw and a tough 
pad on the top jaw, which it uses to rip leaves off plants. Molars in the back are 
used for chewing. Rodents have front teeth that grow continuously throughout their 
lives. Elephants have several sets of teeth, with new sets moving in from the back 
to replace worn-out ones in front. Teeth also make good weapons. Many animals, such
as lions, tigers, dogs, bears, and badgers, show their teeth and growl if threatened.
Some grazing animals, such as horses and zebras, bite attackers. Mice, rabbits, and 
other small animals also bite if they are caught. 
The sharp tusks of a hippopotamus can be used as a weapon. Here, a hippo marks its 
territory by opening its mouth—a behavior seen mainly during mating season. 
Animals with special long teeth called tusks are equipped with dangerous weapons. 
An elephant's two front teeth are tusks, which may stick out of the mouth. The tusks
of a male African elephant can be up to 8 feet long. Elephants use their 
tusks to dig water holes, scrape bark off trees, and spar with each other. They 
also use them as weapons against lions and other animals that prey on their calves.
Hippopotamuses use their long, razor-sharp lower teeth as weapons. A hippo tusk can
grow up to 20 inches long. Males bite each other while fighting. Females use
their tusks to keep males away from their babies. If a predator comes near a calf, 
the mother hippo will attack it, too. A hippo can kill a lion, and can even bite a 
crocodile in half. Another African animal, the warthog, has four tusks. Two sharp 
tusks jut from the lower jaw, and two more curl from the upper jaw. Warthogs use 
these tusks to dig up roots to eat. Male warthogs also use the blunt, curled tusks 
when they fight one another. If a lion threatens a warthog, the warthog runs away 
or dives backward into a burrow, with its tusked snout facing outward. 

CLAWS, HOOVES, AND PINCERS 
A threatened animal with legs—two, four, or more—is most likely to use them to
escape. But if it is cornered or caught, an animal will use its legs and feet to
defend itself. An animal with clawed toes, such as a cat or raccoon, kicks and 
scratches to defend itself. It may also bite at the same time. A kangaroo not only 
bites and punches with its clawed front feet, but also leans back on its tail to 
kick with its hind legs. Then it slashes downward with the sharp claws on its big
hind feet. Birds, such as chickens, will claw and peck as they struggle to escape.
A large bird can also kick at its foe. An ostrich, for example, kicks forward at 
its attacker. Then it slashes downward to rake it with its sharp claws, which 
measure up to 4 inches long. An ostrich's kick is powerful enough to kill 
a lion. Hoofed animals also kick to ward off attackers. A giraffe can kill its only
predator, the lion, with a single kick. A zebra kicks out with its hind legs at a
predator chasing it and can break its jaw or neck. Deer kick at coyotes with their 
front hooves. Many animals lack claws or hooves, but can use other appendages to 
defend themselves. A lobster has large claws called pincers that it uses to catch 
and crush crabs, clams, and other prey. It also uses them to defend itself. A 
lobster's pinching power is strong enough to break a person's finger joint. Crabs 
can pinch hard enough to draw blood. Insects that cannot sting will often bite—
sometimes painfully. 

HORNS AND ANTLERS 
Many kinds of hoofed animals grow horns or antlers on their heads. Horns are bones 
that grow out of the skulls of sheep, goats, cattle, and antelope, such as gazelles.
These bones are covered by a layer of tough material called horn. Horned animals do 
not shed their horns. Antlers also are made of bone, but they fall off and grow 
again each year. Unlike horns, antlers divide into branches. At first glance, a 
deer's antlers look like weapons for self-defense, but they are used more for 
interacting with other deer. Their use as weapons against predators is not their 
main purpose. Although antlers may seem like a good weapon, a deer typically uses 
its antlers more for interacting with other deer than for fighting off predators. 
Male deer of most species grow antlers, while females do not. The males use their 
antlers in battles with other males over females. In these battles, the males shove 
their antlered heads against each other and jab at each other's sides. Female 
reindeer and caribou do grow antlers, but they shed them later in the year than 
males do. The females use antlers to keep other herd members out of the feeding 
holes they have scraped in the snow. Horns grow on both males and females in many 
species of goat, sheep, cattle, and antelope. Males use their horns to battle with 
other males over females. They also use horns as weapons for self-defense. Females 
use their horns to defend themselves and their young against predators. Females of 
large species of antelope are more likely to have horns than females of smaller 
species. These smaller species tend to hide and use camouflage for protection. 
Both male and female rhinoceroses have horns on their faces. Asian rhinos have one 
horn. African rhinos have two. These horns are not made of bone. They are made of 
keratin—the same material found in fingernails, toenails and hair. Male rhinos use 
their horns in battles with one another. Both males and females will also charge at
intruders. Predators, such as lions, are not willing to tackle a grown rhino, but 
they do try to catch calves. The white rhino, an African species, can protect a 
calf simply by standing still with the baby hiding under her huge, two-horned head.

GROUP DEFENSE 
Many animals find safety in numbers by living in large groups. Bison live in herds.
Tuna and many other fish species form large schools. Geese and other birds form 
flocks as they migrate from one place to another when the seasons change. Aphids 
cluster together on stems. Living in a group helps animals defend themselves against
predators in several ways. Lone animals must rely only on their own senses, but an 
animal in a group benefits by having lots of other animals' eyes, ears, and noses 
on the alert for danger. An animal in a group also has a smaller chance of being 
the unlucky individual picked out by a predator. In addition, a group of animals 
fleeing from a predator can create confusion. This makes it harder for a predator 
to focus on one animal to catch. A school of fish will split in two to avoid a 
predator, and then quickly regroup behind it. A herd of zebras can become a 
dazzling display of black and white stripes, making it more difficult for a lion to
see where one zebra ends and another begins. Starlings clump together when a hawk 
approaches. This makes it harder for the hawk to single out one bird. Animal groups
may be made up of just one species. Striped coral-reef catfish, for example, travel 
in a dense, ball-shaped school when they are young. Many seabirds nest in crowded 
colonies on islands and gang up on trespassing predators. Animals may also form 
mixed groups, such as the herds of hoofed animals that migrate across Africa's
plains. There, shaggy horned animals called gnus form herds of up to one million 
animals. Traveling along with them are tens of thousands of zebras and gazelles. 
Groups of animals also may work together to drive off a predator. One of the most 
famous examples of group defense is the circle formed by musk oxen. Musk oxen are 
huge, shaggy cattle that live on the broad, snowy lands of the Arctic known as the 
tundra. Females and young live in herds year-round. Males join these herds for part
of the year. If wolves attack a herd, musk oxen form a circle with their calves in 
the middle and their horns facing out. The wolves face a wall of horns backed up by
hundreds of pounds of muscle. Musk oxen also will rush out and try to hook a wolf 
with their horns. Scientists have seen other animals, such as gnus and white rhinos,
form defensive circles. Zebras do not form circles, but small herds do work together
to foil predators. If a pack of hyenas creeps up on a herd, a male zebra charges at 
them, ready to bite and kick. The females and young gather together and move away. 
Often a female known as the lead mare guides them. Wild horses also behave in this 
way. Other animals, such as elephants and cattle, approach and threaten predators 
that come near their herds. Large African monkeys called baboons also live in 
groups. They sometimes work together to drive off predators. Scientists have seen
males of one species of baboon ganging up on leopards and dogs to chase them away. 
A smaller monkey, the red colobus, also teams up with other males to defend their 
group when chimpanzees attack. The male monkeys get between the females and their 
young and the chimps. They leap onto the chimps and bite them. Many species of 
small, burrowing mammals cooperate against predators, too. These animals alert 
each other to danger. Meerkats are weasel-like animals that live in dry lands of
southern Africa. When they leave their burrows to look for food, a few animals 
stand guard. The guards climb onto a rock or a termite mound and stand on their 
hind legs. They scan the skies for eagles and hawks. They also keep an eye out for
hungry jackals. If a predator appears, the guards call quickly and sharply. This is
the signal for everybody to dive into the burrows. North American prairie dogs, 
which are related to squirrels, also live in burrows. The burrows cover a huge area
of land known as a prairie-dog town. Prairie dogs do not post guards. Yet, because 
there are so many prairie dogs, someone in the town is likely to spot a hawk or a 
coyote. Prairie dogs that spot danger will give a danger call. At this signal, 
everybody scurries underground to safety. This meerkat in the Kalahari Desert of 
South Africa stands guard atop a rock, ready to call out a warning if predators 
approach. 

ALARM SIGNALS 
Meerkats and prairie dogs are just two of the many animals that give alarm calls 
when they see predators. Scientists have found that many kinds of animals give 
alarm calls. These animals often give different calls for different predators. The 
animals that hear the alarms behave in different ways for each call. Florida scrub 
jays take turns being on guard duty while the rest of the family group feeds. When 
a scrub jay sees a predator, it gives an alarm call. It makes a high-pitched scream
if it sees a hawk, and a sharp cawing sound if it sees a cat. The alarm call warns 
other birds of danger. It also tells the predator that it has been spotted. 
Little birds called black-capped chickadees also send coded alarm calls. If a 
chickadee sees a flying predator, such as a hawk, it makes a soft, high-pitched 
call. This tells other birds to hide. Other calls are used to warn of predators 
that are perched on a branch or on the ground. These calls warn other birds that a
predator is near, and even tell them how dangerous it is. 

MOBBING BY BIRDS 
Many species of birds will gang up on a predator and bother it when it is not 
hunting. This behavior is called mobbing. Crows will gather around an eagle perched
in a tree and caw at it. They will even fly close to it and strike it in passing. 
Their caws attract more crows that will join in the attack. The crows mob the eagle 
until it flies away. Small birds mob predators, too. A mob may be made up of birds
of several species. Scientists who study birds have long wondered why birds would 
risk their lives to mob a hawk, cat, fox, or other predator, especially one that is
not hunting. They have come up with several reasons. The mobbing birds may be 
letting the predator know that it has been seen, so it might as well go hunt 
somewhere else. They may be parent birds trying to distract the predator so that it
will not look for their nests. They may be trying to get the attention of a bigger
predator—one that will go after the birds' predator. Mobbing also helps other birds 
know that there is a predator in the neighborhood. 
One Florida scrub jay will look for predators while the family group eats. If it 
spots danger, it calls out an alarm warning so the others can flee. A chickadee that
sees a small owl perched in a tree, for example, adds extra "dee" sounds to the end 
of its call. These extra sounds warn other chickadees that a very 
dangerous predator is in the area. A big owl gets one extra This is because
the small owl is quick enough to catch a chickadee, but the big owl is not; it is 
more likely to hunt for mice and rats. Some mammals, such as meerkats, also 
communicate information about predators with their alarm calls. A meerkat on 
guard duty peeps quietly to let others know that everything is fine. If it sees an 
eagle, it gives a call that sends meerkats scurrying into burrows. If it 
sees a snake, it gives a call that tells other meerkats to climb trees instead. Yet 
another call tells other meerkats to mob a less-dangerous predator and chase it 
away. Vervet monkeys, found in Africa, have one call that means a big cat, such as 
a leopard, is near. This call tells other vervets to climb high up into a tree. 
Another call means an eagle is overhead. This causes monkeys to hide in a bush or 
among the branches of a tree. A third call means "snake." Monkeys stand up on their 
hind legs and look around carefully when they hear this call. Other species of 
monkey—as well as ground squirrels, tree squirrels, and lemurs—also use different 
calls for different predators. Scientists have also found that one species' alarm 
call may be understood by other species. Many animals flee when they hear other 
animals get excited or alarmed, but some animals appear to understand the details 
of the alarm. Little birds called nuthatches know when a chickadee's alarm call 
means "little owl" and when it means "big owl." Not all alarm signals are calls. 
Alarm signals can also be seen, smelled, or otherwise sensed. An alarmed black-tail 
deer raises its tail and the hair on its rump. A patch of skin on its hind leg also
releases a strong odor. The pronghorn, an antelope-like animal of western 
North America, also raises long, white hairs on its rump and releases a scent from 
its musk glands. Insects also use smells as alarm signals. Pheromones are scents
and other chemicals used for communication. Bees, wasps, and ants produce pheromones
when they sting. The pheromones alert other insects, which come to help defend the 
nest. An insect called a lace bug protects her eggs and young by fluttering her 
wings at beetles. If her defense fails and a larva is grabbed, she produces a 
pheromone that warns the other larvae to flee. Likewise, an aphid attacked by a 
predator makes a fluid that not only clogs up the predator's mouth, but also 
contains a pheromone that causes other aphids to dash away. Underwater animals use
pheromones as alarm signals, too. A sea anemone that is nibbled by a fish gives off
a pheromone that makes nearby anemones close up. Many fish, such as minnows, release
pheromones when a predator injures them. Fish that pick up the scent will hide or 
swim away. 










































































































































































































