pretty salma a little red riding hood story from africa 

Salma lived with her granny and grandfather on the quiet side of town, One day, 
her granny said. "Salma! Pretty Salma, please go to market for your old granny, 
who loves you so."
Salma put on her blue scarf, her stripy ntama, her pretty white beads, and her 
yellow sandals. She tucked Granny's shopping list in her ntama, lifted Granny's 
big straw basket 
onto her head, and kissed Granny goodbye. 
"Straight there and back again!" said Granny. "And don't talk to strangers, you 
hear?"
"Okay, I promise," said Salma. 
Off went Salma, flip-flop, flip-flop in her yellow sandals. As she walked, she 
sang her favorite song:
Oh, Salma, Pretty Salma,
Come kiss Granny,
your darling old Granny,
who loves you so!

At the market, she bought a giant watermelon, a speckled rooster, an ice-cold 
pint drink, and a bunch of candy-striped straws.
The sun was growing hot, and the basket felt very heavy. So Salma decided to take 
a shortcut home, through the wild side of town.
Along the way she sang her favorite song:
Oh, Salma, Pretty Salma,
Come kiss Granny,
your darling old Granny,
who loves you so!

"Are you Pretty Salma?" asked a stranger. It was Mr. Dog. He had been listening 
to her song.
"Yes," said Salma. 
"Are you going to Granny's?" asked Mr. Dog.
"Yes," said Salma.
"Well, your basket is much too heavy for such a pretty little head," said Mr. 
Dog. "Allow me to carry it for you."
Salma did feel a bit dizzy from the heat, so she agreed to let Mr. Dog carry her 
basket. 

After a while, Mr. Dog asked, "What are you wearing on your feet?"
"Sandals," replied Pretty Salma.
"They must be making your little feet very hot," he said. "Why don't I wear 
them for you?"
So they stopped, and Mr. Dog slipped his big feet into Salma's sandals.

On they went, floppety-flip, flippety-flop! After a while, Mr. Dog asked, 
"what's that wrap you're wearing?"
"My ntama," replied salma.
"I bet you'd feel cooler without it. I'd be happy to wear it for you."
No sooner had Mr. Dog wrapped Salma's ntama around himself than he asked for 
her scarf and pretty beads. "How do I look?" asked Mr. Dog,
striking a pose. 

Mr. Dog strutted along the road in high style. Salma began to miss her things. 
But when she asked for them back, Mr.  Dog only said, "Some 
music will help us beat the heat. Won't you teach me a song?" 
So Salma tried to teach him her favorite song:
Oh, Salma, Pretty Salma,
Come kiss Granny,
your darling old Granny,
who loves you so!
But Mr. Dog was hopeless at singing. All he could do was go, Woof! Woof! Woof!
"I need a lot more practice," said Mr. Dog. "And until I learn to sing, you 
won't get your things back!"
Salma begged, Salma pleaded. "Mr. Dog, Mr. Dog, please give me back my things!" 
Mr. Dog growled. "Shhh! 
You will never, ever get your things back! Now run away, little girl, before 
I bite you in two!"
Poor Salma got such a fright when she saw his sharp teeth that she ran... 
and ran... and ran... until she found her grandfather, dressed in his anansi costume, 
telling stories.
When Grandfather heard Salma's story, he said, "That's a very exciting story, 
Salma, but it doesn't sound like a happy ending, How can we save Granny?"
"I know," said Salma. "We'll scare Mr. Dog!"
"exactly how will we scare Mr. Dog?" asked Grandfather.
"Like this!" said Salma, putting on the mask of the Ka Ka Motobi Bogeyman. 
Salma picked up Anansi's atumpan and beat it loudly. goema goema Grandfather picked 
up his rattles and 
gave them a fierce shake. shooka shooka Little Abubaker, who loved a good scare,
joined in with clapping sticks. attack 
"Let's go!" cried Salma.

Meanwhile...
...when Granny saw Mr. Dog flip-flopping up the path, she thought it was her 
Pretty Salma.
"Salma, Pretty Salma, come give your granny, who loves you so, a kiss!" cried 
Granny. Mr. Dog leapt up and gave her a sloppy kiss.
"Oh, my, Salma," said Granny. "What a wet nose you have!"
Granny took the heavy basket from Mr. Dog and said "Salma, Pretty Salma, you 
look hungry. Let's eat!" Mr. Dog started to chase the
speckled rooster round and round. 
"Oh, my, Salma," said Granny. "What an appetite you have!"

Then Granny said, "Salma, Pretty Salma, it's time for your bath."
Into the bath leapt Mr. Dog.
"Oh, my, Salma," said Granny. "What hairy ears you have! Are you sure you are 
my Pretty Salma?"
"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" cried Mr. Dog, jumping into Granny's lap and wagging his 
tail. Now Granny was really worried! Did her Pretty Salma have a tail?
Perhaps this wasn't her Pretty Salma!
Well, there was only one way to find out...
"Let's sing our favorite song," said Granny, and she started to sing,
"Oh, Salma, Pretty Salma,
Come kiss Granny,
your darling old Granny,
who loves you so!"
"Woof! Woof! Woof!" barked Mr. Dog.
Then Granny knew she had been tricked. 

She reached for her broom. "Out! Get out!"
But Mr. Dog liked being Pretty Salma far too much to leave Granny's house, 
so instead he growled and snapped at her.
Granny was afraid mr. Dog would bite her in two, so she jumped into her cooking 
pot. Mr. Dog pushed the lid down.
... nice," he thought, "Granny soup!"
Granny cried, "Help, help, help!"

Just then, the door burst open with a loud Goema goema! Shooka shooka! 
attack!
When Mr. Dog saw ka ka motobi the Bogeyman and his gang, he got a terrible fright. 
That bad dog slipped and tripped over his miserable tail- right out of the house, 
back to the wild side of town.

Salma took off her mask and helped Granny climb out of the pot. Then they all 
sat down to eat watermelon and sip an ice-cold pink
drink through candy-striped straws.
The next day, Granny sent Salma to market to buy new clothes. Salma went 
straight there and back. And she never talked to strangers again. 



















