sally ann thunder ann whirlwind crockett a tall tale retold and illustrate 

author's note
the root of much of america's tall tale literature are to be found in the stories that fill the 
davy crockett almanacs which were published from to davy crockett's wife has a prominent role 
in eight of the tales and she is identified as sally ann thunder ann whirlwind in the almanac
adventure entitled a perilous situation of mrs. crockett. my picture book version of her exploits
draws from a number of almanac tales particularly a thief of an alligator a fight
with an alligator a pretty predicament and mike fink trying to scare mrs. crockett

About two hundred years ago a remarkable infant came into the world, beaming like a sunrise. 
Having nine sons already, her parents were overjoyed to welcome their first daughter.
"Howdy! I'm Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind!" shouted the baby in a voice as loud as a blast 
of buckshot. Her parents were astonished. "You can talk!" they cried. "I can out-talk, out-grin, 
out-scream, out-swim, and out-run any baby in Kentucky!" she announced. "You're amazing!" 
exclaimed her parents. Their sons, however, had been hoping for another brother, and they 
did not agree.
"She's a loudmouth and a liar," grumbled one brother. "Everybody knows that babies can't run," 
scoffed another. "Especially baby girls," added the oldest. "she couldn't out-run a loaf of 
bread," sneered the youngest.
"I'm ready to try!" cried their sister. "Let's race to the top of the mountain and back. On 
your mark! Get set! GO!" Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind took off like a cheetah. 
Sally Ann blazed up the mountain, shooting past a gang of racing rabbits as if they were dozing
tortoises. One her way back down, she met her brothers, who were just beginning the climb. 
"I'll see you at the finish line!" she called. 
When Sally Ann's brothers finally returned, they collapsed in the shade for a nap. "Let's have
a swimming race!" cried Sally Ann. But her exhausted brothers had lost interest in sports. "We
quit!" they cried. Sally Ann dove underwater and went fishing with the otters. When an hour had
passed and she didn't surface, her brothers became concerned. Has she drowned? They wondered.
Suddenly Sally Ann rocketed into view juggling fourteen trout, "Grease the griddle!" she cried.
"It's dinnertime!" Sally Ann's brothers finally admitted that their parents were right. "She's
amazing," the agreed.
Sally Ann continued to astonish folks throughout her childhood. When she was one year old, she 
beat the fasted runners in the state. At four she flipped the strongest arm wrestlers. At seven 
she was the champion tug-of-war team. 

annual state fair marathon
muscle man marvin boston athletic club

national tug of war tournament
On her eighth birthday Sally Ann decided she was grown-up and ready for new challenges. "I'm off
to the frontier!" she announced. For several years she lived with different animals and learned 
their habits.
She loved life in the wilderness during every season except winter. Finally, the fierce cold 
drove her underground to hibernate with the bears. Deep in a cave that bristled with stalactites 
and stalagmites Sally Ann snuggled close to a large warm grizzly. 
Suddenly the bear awakened, and Sally Ann felt a blast of terrible heat from his great oven like 
mouth. It was clear that the bear was more interested in a snack than a roommate. 
But before the monster could swallow her, Sally Ann stunned him with a grin as bright as a flash 
of lightning.
Over backward he went, rolling among razor-sharp stalactites and stalagmites that skinned him 
from his ears to his toes. Naked and embarrassed, the creature scrambled out of sight. "That was 
a close shave for both of us!" cried Sally Ann. She wrapped herself in the bear's fur and set off
in search of new adventures.
That bearskin kept Sally Ann cozy for many winters, and she grew tall and strong. But as the 
years rolled by she became tired of living alone. 
One day she came upon an unhappy fellow who had dozed off while leaning against a tree and 
awakened to find himself stuck. Two eagles were adding to his misery by yanking out his hair 
to line their nests. "You're in a pretty predicament, mister!" exclaimed Sally Ann. "Let me
give you a hand."
Sally Ann tried to shoo away the eagles, but they fought her like flapping furies. So she let 
loose a wild scream that blasted the color off their heads and tail and left them as placid as 
pigeons. "Well, star spangle my banner!" cried Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind. "I've just 
invented bald eagles!"
Unfortunately, the fellow Sally Ann was trying to rescue had been knocked unconscious by her 
scream. Quickly she hauled six rattlers out of a nearby snake den, knotted them together, and 
lassoed a branch. One sharp tug and his head popped free.

he's kind of handsome thought sally ann i'll freshen up and look my best before i nurse him back to health
Sally Ann grabbed a hornet's nest for a bonnet and fogged herself with the perfume of a passing
skunk. Then she heaved her patient into the creek.
Just as she expected, the minute he hit that icy water he perked right up. "My heart's pounding 
like a buffalo stampede," he sputtered. "So is mine," confessed Sally Ann. "My name is Davy 
Crockett. Marry me!" he exclaimed.

sally ann was astonished to learn that she had rescued the most famous woodsman in america
lightning flashed between them and they fell head over heels in love

The happy couple celebrated their wedding with a batch of eagle-egg eggnog. Then they settled 
down in a farmhouse with a fine view of the Mississippi River. 
When their first child, Hardstone, was born, all three of them whooped for joy. "Let's have 
thirty more!" cried Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind Crockett.
Not long afterward a city slicker stopped by and asked Davy if he would be willing to run in 
November. Thinking that a footrace was being organized, Davy replied, "Sign me up!" Later Davy
was flabbergasted to discover that he had agreed to run for the United States Congress-what's 
more, he'd been elected!
As soon as Davy left for Washington, Sally Ann started having trouble with the alligators. 
She hid her porkers in hollow logs, but the gators stole the logs and the hogs. "they'll be 
snatching little Hardstone next," fretted Sally Ann.
Late the next night a gang of bull alligators surrounded the Crocketts' farmhouse.
Sally Ann awoke to a tremendous racket. Ceiling plaster was falling, and plates leaped from the
shelves.
To Sally Ann's dismay the hooligan reptiles swarmed onto her roof to play King of the Mountain. 
Chimneys toppled, windows shattered, and shingles scattered as the game got under way. 
Sally Ann tried to stop the alligators with a lightning-flash grin. It had no effect. She blasted
them with an earsplitting scream. "Get off my roof!" she hollered. The alligators ignored her.
Finally, Sally Ann flung herself into the King of the Mountain competition with such energy that
she kicked up a tornado. 
In a few seconds all the alligators had been blown away, and Sally Ann Thunder Ann Whirlwind 
Crockett stood alone as Queen of the Mountain. For the next few days it rained alligators from
Minnesota to New Orleans.
When Davy Crockett returned from Congress, he was so proud of Sally Ann's heroic feat that he 
couldn't stop bragging. He even interrupted a wrestling match to tell the story to Mike Fink.
Now, Mike Fink was a keelboat captain as well as a champion wrestler. He had tangled with 
alligators up and down the Mississippi, and he couldn't believe that anyone had trounced a whole 
tribe of the critters at once. 
Mike had his crew stitch him into an alligator hide. Then he set out to scare Sally Ann into 
confessing that her husband's Queen of the Mountain story was a bald-faced lie. 
Mike crept up behind Sally Ann and little hardstone. "The King of the Mountain has arrived!" he
roared. 
Sally Ann whipped that alligator hide around so fast that the stitched popped and Mike Fink was 
propelled skyward.
Folks knew that every strong man in the Mississippi Valley who wrestled Mike Fink found himself
thrown flat, so they were amazed to hear that Mike had been flung five miles upriver by Sally Ann 
Thunder Ann Whirlwind Crockett.


the great alligator tornado stirred by up sally ann thunder ann whirlwind crockett
crockett country
new orleans
mississippi river minnesota
ohio river washington