See me grow 


animal babies
Some animal babies hatch from eggs laid by their mothers.
Other animal babies grow inside their mothers' tummies.

Insects
most insects lay eggs. some eggs are blue; others are green or yellow
A butterfly is an insect.

Fish

Most fish lay eggs.
They sometimes lay hundreds of eggs at one time.

All fish live, and lay their eggs, in water.

Amphibians

Most amphibians lay eggs.
They lay them in water.

Frogs and toads are amphibians.    

hatching eggs
Baby birds have to crack their eggs open and climb out.

baby ostrich inside an egg

Reptiles

most reptiles lay eggs.
Their eggs are sometimes soft.
alligators are reptiles

Birds

Birds lay eggs.
The parents sometimes sit on the eggs until they hatch.

Birds often make nests for their eggs

Mammals

Most mammals don't lay eggs. Their babies grow inside the mothers' tummies.

Rabbits
Baby rabbits are very little when they are born, but they grow up fast.
Baby rabbits are called kittens.

Rabbits are mammals.

A baby rabbit can have more than ten brothers and sisters!

Baby rabbits are born pink and hairless. Their eyes are closed.

After a few days, soft baby fur grows and the kittens' eyes open.

At two weeks old, the kittens leave the nest and find their own food



From caterpillar to butterfly

Butterfly babies don't look like butterflies at all. Follow

their journey.

From egg to adult

A butterfly lays a round egg.

A caterpillar hatches out of the egg.

The caterpillar eats and eats.

It covers itself with a chrysalis for protection.

A butterfly is an insect.

Changes take place inside the chrysalis.

After two weeks, the chrysalis opens.

A butterfly climbs out of the chrysalis The butterfly flies away 

A Frogs life 
Baby frogs live in water. Grown up frogs live on land and in water.
From tadpole to frog
A mother frog lays her eggs in water.

frog

Soon the tadpoles turn into frogs. Grown-up frogs jump around on land and splash in water.

Frogs are amphibians.
The tadpoles breathe in water, but the grown-ups breathe in air and water

The eggs hatch into tadpoles that swim in water.

tadpoles

The tadpoles grow legs and slowly lose their tails.
In a Pouch
A baby kangaroo is called a joey. It lives in its mother's pouch

The mother's pouch is a pocket in her tummy.

kangaroo 

joey

A joey sometimes sticks its head out of the pouch.
A new joey is tiny.
It climbs straight into its mother's pouch.

The mother makes milk The joey drinks it inside her pouch.

After about six months of growing, the joey climbs out.

These mammals with pouches live in Australia.

joey koala 

After about six months, a baby koala leaves its mother's pouch and hitches a ride

Shark babies
Many sharks lay eggs.
Shark eggs can be unusual shapes and sizes.

The dogfish shark lays eggs called mermaid's purses.

dogfish egg case 

Baby sharks are born with a lot of sharp teeth!

dogfish shark 

The shark lays a pair of egg cases on the seafloor.

The baby sharks grow inside the cases.

When the sharks are ready they
break out.

The baby sharks have to survive alone in the sea.
Sharks are fish.
Many fish lay eggs. This great white shark has eggs that hatch

inside her, so she gives birth to live

young.

Leopard sharks give birth to up to 33 live babies at once.
Female leopard sharks are about ten years old when they first have babies

Egg to chick A hen lays eggs, as all birds do.

She sits on the eggs to keep them warm until they hatch into chicks

The chick uses a special egg tooth to break the shell.
Eggshell
The hen sits on her eggs to keep them warm and safe When a chick has grown too big for its shell, it hatches.
As it grows into a chicken the chick grows new feathers A chick spends 21 days in the egg before it hatches 

Bee grubs

Honeybees live in big groups and look after their babies together Nectar is a sugary liquid made by some flowers

Bees make nests out of wax. The queen bee lays one egg in each little cell.

After three days, the eggs hatch into babies, called grubs.

At six days old the grub wraps itself in a cocoon and changes inside it.
Worker bees collect nectar from flowers and turn it into honey.
The honey is fed to the grubs.

queen bee worker bee

Worker bees are busy insects.

After about two weeks, an adult bee
wiggles out of its cell.

alligators

Alligators, like
most reptiles lay eggs that hatch into babies An alligator is born with a full set of sharp teeth.

The mother alligator sometimes carries her babies to the water in her mouth.
The female alligator makes a nest out of mud and plants. She lays 25 to 50 eggs.

The mother guards her eggs. After about two months, the babies hatch.

The mother takes the babies down to the water. The baby alligators can swim right away.

Alligator babies stay with their mothers for up to two years.

baby alligator

Fish babies
Clown fish live among coral reefs. These fish lay hundreds of eggs on rocks. Clown fish hide in poisonous sea anemones for safety.

Clown fish lay their eggs close to poisonous sea anemones. Doing this helps keep the eggs safe from fish that like to eat them.

From eggs to young

Clown fish lay hundreds of eggs. The parents guard them fiercely.

About five days later, the eggs hatch into tiny clown fish.

The baby fish swim away and find food by themselves.
clown fish babies
eggs

Baby horses
Baby horses can run when they are very young to escape danger in the Wild A wild foal stays close to its mother for about a year A horse is a mammal Horse babies are called foals The foal grows inside its mother's tummy until it is ready to be born.

The foal can stand up and walk around minutes after being born.

The mother horse makes milk in her body for the foal to drink.

After a few days, the foal can gallop faster than you can.

Puppies
Dogs can have litters of up to twelve puppies but most litters have about six
Birth:
A mother dog gives birth to a litter of puppies

Female dogs, like all mammals, make milk inside their bodies .
The puppies drink the milk for 2 months
food for Mom!

1 day 10 days 4 weeks 2 months
The puppies can smell their mother's milk at 1 day old.
At about 10 days old the puppies open their eyes At 4 weeks old the puppies can wag their tails and bark By 2 months, the puppies no longer need their mother

Puppies love to roll around and play just as human children do 

Baby Birds Robins, like many birds, lay their eggs in nests they make in trees.

Look out for the red tailed hawk it likes to eat baby robins

The mother makes a nest and lays her eggs.

The baby birds are born blind and without feathers.

The chicks open their mouths wide to be fed.

The parents feed the chicks insects and berries.

At two weeks, the chicks are ready to leave.

The chicks leap out of the nest and fly away.

American robins hatch from beautiful bright blue eggs
