simple machines forces in action simple machines forces in action



Timeless Machines
Powerful machines fill a construction site. Bulldozers move the earth, 
loaders carry gravel from one place to another, and cranes hoist heavy 
beams off the ground. A noisy jackhammer drills into the rocky ground. 
Construction workers rely on machines to build towering skyscrapers that
 soar to the sky. These machines use electricity, gasoline, or some other
 form of power. 
Long ago, people did not have huge machines with engines and motors to 
help them lift and carry heavy loads. But they did have machines that 
helped them do work. People have been using machines for thousands of 
years.

Machines help people lift, carry, and dig at a construction site

Building the pyramids
Ancient Egyptians built the pyramids out of huge stone blocks. They had
 to cut, carry, and lift massive blocks. Each block had to be placed in
 the right position. They could not do this without the help of machines.
 Workers used levers to help pick up the blocks and put them in the right
 spot. Rollers moved blocks from one place to another. As the pyramids
 grew taller, workers built ramps to move blocks up to a higher level.

Levers, rollers, and ramps are simple machines that help people do work.
 A machine is any device that allows work to be done with less effort. 
Effort is a force acting on an object that moves the object. The force 
might be pushing, pulling, or lifting. At the beach you use a shovel to
 help you lift and carry sand when you build a castle. The shovel is a 
simple machine that helps you do work.
Simple machines make moving something easier.
This book explores the six types of simple machine: inclined planes, 
wedges, screws, levers, wheels and axles, and pulleys.

Thousands of years ago, people used simple machines to build the 
pyramids

About the experiments 
Carrying out the experiments in this book will help you to understand 
simple machines.
The experiments use everyday materials and tools. Always read through 
the instructions before you start, and take your time. You will need an 
adult to help with some of the experiments.

Inclined Plane 
Suppose you are building a wall from large rocks. You must lift heavy
rocks into a wagon to bring them to the building site. The rocks are too
 heavy to lift, so you use a ramp to roll them into the wagon. When you 
push rocks up a ramp, you are using an inclined plane to help you do
 work. An inclined plane is a simple machine it is a slanted surface 
used to raise or lower objects. 

Furniture movers use an inclined plane to lift heavy loads onto a truck

Historic Planes
About 2600 years ago, the ancient Greeks built a 6-km (3.7-mile) 
inclined plane to move boats overland. Instead of having to sail 
around a dangerous peninsula, boats were pulled along a track paved
 with limestone. The track was called the Diolkos meaning portage 
across.

Force 
Resistance 
Inclined plane

An inclined plane adds distance to the work that must be done, but 
reduces effort. 

Distance versus effort

Why can you lift the rock into the wagon using the ramp, but not without
 it? It takes a certain amount of effort to lift a rock. The same amount 
of effort is required with a ramp, but an inclined plane changes the way 
you do the work. Instead of lifting the rock straight up, you push it 
along the ramp, over a longer distance. The extra distance means you do
 not have to use as much effort or force. If the distance along which you
 push a rock is twice as it takes half the force to do the same work and 
move the rock to the same height. There is a trade-off between the amount
 of effort required and the distance.
Imagine that you have a choice of two trails to climb to the top of a 
mountain. One route is short and steep, and the other trail is long and 
gentle. It will take the same amount of effort to reach the top no matter
 which trail you choose. But the steep trail requires more effort and 
less distance than the gentle trail. Which inclined plane will you climb?

Using an inclined plane
For this activity you will need:
A table
Two books, each about 5 cm (12in.) thick
A paper clip
Scissors
A ruler
Sticky tape 
A rubber band
A sandwich bag with twist tie
A handful of gravel
A piece of string, 30 cm (12 in.) long
A smooth board, about 30 cm 60 cm (1 ft. 2 ft.)
Paper and a pencil

Steps to follow
Stack the books on the table
Cut the rubber band, making one long piece
Tie the paper clip to one end of the band 
Hang the rubber band from the top of the ruler, so the bottom of the paper 
clip reaches to 9 cm (3.5 in.) on the ruler
The other end of the rubber band hangs over the back of the ruler
Place gravel in the plastic bag, and fasten it closed with the twist tie
Tie one end of the string around the bag and the other end to the paper 
clip
Place the bag next to the books on the table. Hold the ruler and lift 
straight up until the bottom of the bag is at the level of the books. 
Observe where the paper clip stretched to and record the number on the
 ruler at the tip of the paper clip
Place the board on top of the books, making a ramp
Holding the ruler pull the bag to the top of the books. Observe where the 
paper clip reaches and record the number on the ruler corresponding to the 
tip of the paper clip

How does it work?
The amount that the rubber band stretched shows the effort needed to lift
 the gravel. Did it take more effort to lift the bag straight up, or to 
slide it up the ramp? You probably recorded a larger number when you lifted 
straight up. That means that it required more effort to lift the load up to 
the height of the books.
When you pulled the bag up the inclined plane, you pulled it farther but
 with less effort. Using an inclined plane makes it easier to lift a load 
by increasing the distance the load travels.

Penny power
For this activity you will need:
Two books, each about 5 cm (12 in.) thick
A smooth board, about 30 cm 60 cm (1ft. 2 ft.)
Plastic cup
A piece of string, 1.5 meters (5 ft.) long
Pennies
Paper and a pencil
A plastic container
A hole puncher

Steps to follow
Stack the two books near the edge of a table. Prop one end of the board on 
the books to make an inclined plane
Punch two holes on opposite sides of the top of the cup. Thread one end of 
the string through the holes and tie it.
Tie the other end of the string under the lip of the plastic container
Put the container on the ramp
Drape the string over the end of the board, with the cup hanging down
Place pennies in the cup, one at a time. Count and record the number of 
pennies needed to raise the container to the top of the board
Remove one book from under the end of the board
How many pennies do you think you will need to lift the container to the 
top of this lower ramp? Record your estimate
Repeat the experiment and count the number of pennies needed to lift the 
container to the top of the lower ramp. 

How does it work?
You probably found that you needed fewer pennies to lift the container to
 a lower height. The distance traveled was the same because the length of
 the board was the same. But the height climbed was less, so it took less
 effort to do the work.
What would happen if you put a small toy inside the plastic container? Set
 up the ramp again, with two books underneath. Do you need more or fewer 
pennies to raise the container? When you add weight to the load in the 
container, it takes more effort to reach the top of the ramp.
We use many kinds of inclined planes to make it easier to lift heavy loads.
 Cars drive up ramps to reach highways. We climb stairs, an inclined plane, 
to reach the top of buildings. You ride your bicycle up a long, twisting
 road instead of a steep slope to make your climb easier.

Wedge
The wedge is a simple machine that is used to push things apart. It is
 made of two inclined planes, joined back-to-back. A wedge is wide at one
 end and thin at the other. An axe and the tip of a nail are examples of 
wedges. 
When we use an inclined plane to do work, the inclined plane does not move.
 The object being lifted or lowered moves along the inclined plane.
A wheelchair travels up a ramp, and the wheelchair moves, but the ramp 
stays still. The inclined plane makes the effort easier by using a longer 
distance to lessen the amount of effort needed to lift a load.
A wedge is a moving inclined plane. It uses force to come between two 
things. An axe is swung into a log. When the axe hits the log, the force 
is pushed from above to the sides and splits the log apart. A wedge changes
 the direction of the force that is applied to something.

A wedge is hammered into a log, and the log splits apart 

Skinny wedges
The sharper the point or narrower the edge of a wedge, the less effort it 
takes to push an object apart. You can push a thin wedge a longer distance 
than a thick wedge, but with less effort. The blade of a knife is a wedge 
with a thin, sharp edge. When you slice an apple with a sharp knife it 
does not take much effort. The force that you apply to the knife handle
 moves the thin blade, which pushes apart the apple.
You have a wedge inside you your teeth! You can split an apple by using 
your jaw muscles to push your teeth into it. Your front teeth move up and 
down, and the apple splits apart.
A doorstop is a wedge used to hold things. By pushing the thin edge of the
 wedge underneath the door, the door is raised. The door pushes the wedge
 down against the floor, holding it in place.

When you chew an apple, your teeth act as wedges that split the apple
apart 

Wedges at work
For this activity you will need:
Two wooden building blocks (rectangular shaped)
One skinny wedge-shaped block (a ramp or roof piece from a building
 block set)
One fat wedge-shaped block (as above)
A ruler
Paper and a pencil

Steps to follow
Line up the two blocks so they are side by side. The narrow ends of 
the blocks should be touching
Push the skinny wedge between the blocks, from above
With the ruler, measure the distance between the ends of the blocks after
 being separated by the wedge. Record the distance between the blocks
Move the blocks together again. Now push the fat wedge between them, from 
above
Measure the distance between the ends of the blocks, and record it

How does it work?

What happened when a wedge was pushed between the blocks? You pushed from
 above, exerting a downward force on the blocks. Because of the shape of
 the wedge, the blocks moved to the sides. The wedge changed the direction
 of the force from downward to sideways.
The thickness of a wedge changes the amount of work that can be done with
 the wedge. How far apart did the blocks move with the thick and thin 
wedges? You pushed the wedge down the same distance, from the top of the 
blocks to the bottom of the blocks. But the thick wedge made the blocks
 slide farther apart than the thin wedge. A thick wedge can move something
a farther distance, but it requires more effort. Because the blocks were
 easy to separate, you probably could not feel the difference in the effort
 needed to move them apart with the thick and thin wedges.

Cutting with wedges
Many cutting tools use wedges to do work. The blades of a scissors form 
two wedges that move in opposite directions. They cut material where they
 meet. A can opener has a wedge-shaped cutting wheel that pushes into a 
can's lid. An electric shaver has many wedge-shaped blades that slice 
through hair. A plow is a wedge-shaped tool that cuts the top layer of
 soil, then lifts and turns it over.

Each tooth of a saw is a wedge that cuts through wood 

Wedge power
For this activity you will need:
A block of scrap wood (soft wood such as pine, if available), about 5 
cm (12 in.) thick
A hammer
A thin nail
A nail of medium thickness
A thick nail
A ruler
Paper and a pencil
Safety goggles

Warning: Adult help will be needed for this experiment 

Steps to follow
Measure and record the length of each nail
Ask an adult to strike the thin nail 10 times with the hammer hammering 
it into the block of wood. They should wear safety goggles
Measure how much of the nail sticks out from the block of wood. To 
calculate how far the nail was driven into the wood, subtract the length 
sticking out of the wood from the total length of the nail. Record this
 length.
Ask an adult to strike the medium nail 10 times with the hammer, into the 
block of wood
Measure how much of the medium nail sticks out from the block of wood.
 Calculate and record how far the nail was driven into the wood
Ask an adult to strike the thick nail 10 times with the hammer, into the 
block of wood
Measure how much the thick nail sticks out from the block of wood. 
Calculate and record how far the nail was driven into the wood.

How does it work?
Which of the nails was easiest to hammer into the wood? Which nail went 
farthest into the wood?
You probably found that it was easier to hammer a thin nail into the wood 
than a thick nail. The thin nail is easier to hammer because the point of 
the nail (the wedge) is thinner. It takes less effort to push the thin 
wedge into the wood because it makes a smaller hole. The thicker nail makes 
a wider opening in the wood. It requires more effort to push aside more
 wood fibers to make the larger hole.

The tip of a nail is a wedge that pushes apart wood, driving the nail 
into the wood. Nails can be used to fasten two pieces of wood together 

Screw
Look closely at a screw and you will find another simple machine. 
A screw is made of an inclined plane wrapped around a cylinder. A screw has
 three parts: the head, shaft, and tip. Examine the shaft of a screw and 
you see threads wound around it. If you could straighten these threads, 
they would form an inclined plane.

head
shaft
tip

The threads of a screw are an inclined plane wrapped around a central 
shaft
Lessening the effort                    
An inclined plane lessens the effort needed to lift or lower something by 
increasing the distance over which the work is done. A screw allows work 
to be done in the same way with less effort. The threads of a screw turn 
around and around as they cut into wood or other materials. Less effort is
 needed to cut into the wood because of the increased distance that the
 threads travel.
You can demonstrate how turning a screw a long distance lessens the effort
 needed to do work. Examine the lid of a peanut butter jar or other type 
of jar with a screw-on cap. The inside of the lid is a screw with a thread.
 The threads turn and grip the jar as you open and close it. Place the lid
 on the jar, and turn it closed. Your hand moves around several times to 
screw the lid on as it travels a short distance up or down. You do not 
have to turn the lid with great force. Instead, you turn it a longer 
distance by moving your hand around and around.

A construction auger is a screw that drills holes deep into the ground

Moving in circles 
Like a wedge, a screw is designed to change the direction of force. 
Turn a screwdriver in a circle, and the threads of the screw cut down 
into a plank of wood. The circular motion of the screwdriver is changed
 into forward motion as the screw moves up or down. The blades of a fan
 are another type of screw that changes the direction of force. The
 blades turn around and around, pulling air in and pushing it out.

Making a screw
For this activity you will need:
A pencil
A sheet of paper (210 mm  297 mm/ 8.5 in.  11 in.)
A colored marker
Scissors 
A ruler

Steps to follow
You can prove that a screw is an inclined plane by making a screw. 
Make a mark at 13 cm (5 in.) along the bottom of a sheet of paper. 
With a ruler, draw a line connecting the two marks. You will have drawn 
a right triangle, measuring 13 cm  23 cm  28.5 cm (5 in. 9 in.  10.3 
in.)
Color the slanted edge of the inclined plane (the longest edge of the 
triangle) with a marker
Cut the triangle from the paper, along the line. Notice that the triangle 
is the shape of a ramp, or inclined plane
Position the shortest side (13 cm or 5 in.) of the triangle along the 
side of the pencil. Evenly wrap the paper around the pencil by rolling 
the pencil 

How does it work?
When you wrapped your inclined plane around the pencil, you made a screw. 
The long side of the inclined plane (the colored edge) was wound around 
the shaft of the screw. This colored edge represents the threads of a 
screw.

Screws that hold
The model that you made of a screw cannot hold material together, but 
that is the job of many screws. The threads of a wood screw push against
 wood, and hold pieces of wood firmly in place. The screw on a vise brings 
clamps together which hold an object tightly. A water faucet also has a 
screw inside. The screw moves a stopper to stop the flow of water or to 
let water flow out. The base of many light bulbs have screws that let them
 fit securely in a lamp. What other types of screws can you find in your 
home?

A screw with narrow threads is easier to turn than one with wider threads.
 Narrow threads are spaced closer together, so it takes more turns to 
tighten the screw, but less effort. These children are tightening the 
screws on their skateboard. 


Screws that lift
For this activity you will need:
An empty can (a tall can works best)
Clear plastic tubing (about four times as long as the can is high)
Masking tape
A large bowl
Water
Food coloring

Steps to follow
You can make a screw that can lift water up from a bowl. Tape the 
clear plastic tubing to the top of the can
Wind the tubing around the can, so it spirals like the threads of 
a screw
Tape the tubing securely to the bottom of the can. Add one or two
 pieces of tape in the middle of the spiral, so the tubing stays
 securely on the can.
Add water to the bowl, filling it about halfway. Leave the bowl 
in the kitchen sink to avoid spills
Carefully add three drops of food coloring to the water
Tilting the can slightly, place the top end in the water. Turn the 
can until you see colored water in the tubing
Carefully lift the can so it is above the water. Keeping the can tilted, 
continue to turn it. What happens to the water in the tube?

How does it work?
The screw that you made is a machine called an Archimedes' screw. Like
 all screws, it changes the direction of force. When you turned the 
screw with a circular movement, the water moved upward in the threads.
About 2,300 years ago, it is thought that a scientist named Archimedes 
invented a machine like this for lifting water. It was used to pump water
 from mines and ship holds and for irrigation. The Archimedes' screw had 
threads wound around a central shaft, inside a hollow pipe. When the screw
 is turned, it scoops up water and carries it up the pipe. Using an 
Archimedes' screw, a farmer could lift water from a stream or pond to
 an irrigation ditch. Archimedes' screws are still used for irrigation 
in many parts of the world. They are also used for lifting in other
 machines, such as combine harvesters.

Archimedes’ screws are used as water pumps to irrigate land. They can 
be turned by people or by animals

Lever
You buy a can of paint. The lid of the can fits tightly, so the paint 
does not leak out. You try to pull it off, but it does not budge. How 
will you loosen the lid? You might fit the blade of a screwdriver under
 the lid of the can. When you push down on the screwdriver handle, the 
lid pops up. You are using the screwdriver as a lever, a simple machine
 that does work.
A lever consists of a bar that moves up and down and tilts on a certain
 point. The point on which the bar tilts is called the fulcrum. You 
apply force to one part of a lever by pushing or pulling it. The force 
is called the effort, and the object moved by a lever is called the load.


To pry a tightly fitting lid off a can, you need a lever 

Effort and load
If you have ever played on a seesaw, you have been both the effort 
and the load on a lever. Imagine that you are trying to lift a person
 who is much heavier than you. You are the effort, trying to lift a 
heavy load. How will you do it? If the fulcrum is the same distance 
between both people on the seesaw, you will be stuck. But if the 
heavier person moves closer to the fulcrum and you move further from 
the fulcrum, you will be able to lift your load with less effort. Then
 it will be your turn to be the load that the other person lifts! As
 with an inclined plane, there is a trade-off between the amount of 
effort and the distance moved.
The word lever is from the French word meaning to raise. More than 
2,300 years ago, the scientist Archimedes understood how, with enough
 distance, a lever could raise a heavy object. He said, Give me a lever
 long enough and a fulcrum on which to place it and I shall move the
 world.

With the help of a lever, children can lift a heavier person

Make a dime balance
For this activity you will need:
A small plastic water bottle 
A ruler
Ten dimes
Sticky Tape

Steps to follow
Make a simple balance to find out how levers work. Fill the bottle 
with water, put the cap on tightly, and lay the bottle down flat. 
Tape the bottle down so it does not roll around. The water bottle 
will be the fulcrum on which your lever rests.

Place a ruler over the water bottle. The ruler is the lever arm.
Try to make the ruler balance. To do so, you will have to place the
 mid-point of the ruler (15 cm or 6 in. mark) on the fulcrum
Carefully place one dime on each end of the lever arm until the lever 
balances again. Place the dimes on the 3 cm (1 in.) and 27 cm (11 in.)
 marks
Stack five dimes on each side, and adjust them until they balance
Remove one dime from one side, and place it on the opposite side. 
Adjust the placement of the stacks so that six dimes will balance with
 four dimes.
Predict where you will need to place the dimes to balance seven dimes 
and three dimes. Test and see if your prediction is correct.
Can you balance a stack of eight dimes and a stack of two? If you cannot 
balance them on your ruler, consider how you might change your balance. 
Find a longer lever arm, and see if your balance will work. With a longer
 lever arm, can you balance a stack of nine dimes with a single dime?

How does it work? 
By adjusting the distance between the load and the fulcrum, you can 
balance a large stack of dimes with a small stack. The large stack of 
dimes pushes down with more force than the smaller one. A lever allows
 you to balance different forces by changing the distance from the fulcrum. 
By moving the effort farther from the fulcrum, less effort is needed and 
a smaller force can balance a larger one.

A balance is a type of lever that measures weight. The two sides are
 balanced by sliding weights closer to or father from the fulcrum

What kind of lever?
Levers are simple machines that allow effort to move something more 
easily by increasing the force applied to another object. Many tools 
that you use every day are levers. There are three different kinds of 
lever. The position of the fulcrum, effort, and load differs for each 
type. Search for each type of lever in your home.
First-class lever: In a first-class lever, the fulcrum is between the 
effort and the load. When force is applied, the effort moves in the 
opposite direction. Push down on a seesaw, and the person on the other
 side goes up. Boat oars and the claw of a hammer are first-class levers.
 Can you find others?

Pull down on the handle of this first-class lever to pry a nail 
from a board 

Second-class lever: In a second-class lever, the load is between 
the fulcrum and the effort. A wheelbarrow is a second-class lever. 
The fulcrum the wheel is at one end, the effort your hands at the other, 
and the load in the middle. You can raise a heavy load because it is 
closer to the fulcrum than the effort. The long handles of a wheelbarrow 
add the distance needed to lift loads with less effort. A nutcracker and 
a bottle opener are also second-class levers. What other second-class 
levers can you find?

This second-class lever lets you lift a heavy load of dirt 

Third-class lever: In a third-class lever, the effort is between 
the fulcrum and the load. A fishing rod is a third-class lever. 
The fulcrum the balancing hand is at one end, the effort the hand 
used to pull up the fish is in the middle, and the load the fish 
is at the other end. When you catch a fish, the fish is lifted up 
farther than the distance your hand lifts on the rod. The distance 
it travels can be greater because it is farther from the fulcrum. 
A broom, shovel, tennis racquet, and hockey stick are all third-class 
levers. What others can you find?


Swing the handle of a third-class lever and the ball soars away 

Pulley
Imagine lifting a grand piano up a narrow flight of stairs. How could 
you make such a difficult job easier? You might tie a rope around the 
piano and use a pulley on a crane to hoist it up to a window, and then
 bring it inside. A pulley is a simple machine that lets you pull down 
to lift something up. A pulley consists of a wheel with a rope, belt, 
or chain wrapped around it. Pulling the rope down lifts the object 
attached to the pulley. With some pulleys, the direction of force is 
changed.
The simplest type of pulley is a single pulley. One wheel is fixed to 
a support, and a rope is attached to the load and looped over the wheel. 
When the rope is pulled down, the load moves up the same distance. 
A single pulley does not change the effort needed to lift a load, 
but it seems easier because you are pulling down instead of lifting 
up

With this single pulley, you pull down on a rope and the load moves 
up the same distance
Less effort is needed to lift a load with a double pulley, but the 
rope must be pulled a farther distance 

Easy lifting
Some pulleys reduce the effort needed for lifting. A double pulley 
has two wheels that are connected. One wheel is attached to the load, 
and the other wheel is fixed to a support. The rope passes over the 
top wheel, loops around the lower wheel, and back up to the top wheel.
 When the rope is pulled, the load moves only half the distance. 
Because the distance is decreased, the force is increased. A double 
pulley can lift twice as much weight with the same effort. By 
increasing the number of pulleys that are connected together, 
more and more weight can be lifted with the same effort.

Powerful pulleys
Archimedes wanted to prove the power of a pulley to the king. He
 designed a complicated pulley system that moved a ship into the 
sea with just a few movements of his hand. The ship had needed 
many laborers to move it into position without pulleys.


A ski lift uses giant pulleys that help bring skiers up the mountain 

Make a pulley
For this activity you will need:
Empty thread spools
About 2.5 meters (8 feet) of string
Four twist ties
Scissors
A pail with a handle
Rocks

Steps to follow
Make a single, fixed pulley. Twist two twist ties together, to form
 one long tie.
Thread the long tie through the spool and twist it securely to a
 closet bar or other fixed point.
Place rocks inside the pail, so that it is heavy to lift.
Loop the long string over the spool. Attach one end of the string 
to the handle of the pail.
Pull down on the other end to raise the load. Was the pail harder or 
easier to lift?
Turn your single pulley into a double pulley. Untie the knot from the 
long string to the pail.
Twist the other two ties together. Thread this long tie through the 
second spool, and twist it securely to the handle of the pail. This
 forms a moveable pulley that moves with the load.
Tie one end of the long string to the closet bar. Loop the long string 
under the lower pulley (attached to pail), and back up and over the top
 of the upper pulley.
Pull on the free end of the long string to raise the load. Was the pail 
harder or easier to lift than with the single pulley?

How does it work?
A single pulley does not change the effort required to lift a load. The 
distance you pull is the same as the distance that the pail travels. 
Since it is easier to pull than to lift an object, the pulley might 
have made lifting the pail easier.
Your heavy pail probably seemed lighter when you lifted it with a double 
pulley. A double pulley can lift more weight, but you must pull farther.
The load travels half the distance that you pull the string. By increasing
 the distance that you pull, the effort needed to lift the load is 
decreased.
How could you make your pulley pull even more weight? Experiment with
 a four-pulley system using pairs of spools side by side.

Pulleys: Two against one
For this activity you will need:
Two friends
Two brooms (or two poles about as thick as a broom handle)
Rope (about 3 meters/ 10 feet)

Steps to follow
You can make a moveable pulley that will move your friends. Tie one end 
of the rope to one broom handle.
Ask your two friends to stand facing each other about 75 cm (2.5 ft.) 
apart. Have each person hold a broom handle in front, so that the brooms
 are about 60 cm (2 ft.) apart. The broom handles will be the wheels of 
your pulley.
Wrap the rope around the broom handles two times.
Stand facing your friends and hold on to the free end of the rope.
Try to pull your friends toward you while they pull the brooms away from 
each other.
Wrap the rope around the handles two more times. Now try to pull your 
friends while they pull the brooms away.

How does it work?
Could you pull both your friends? Unless you are very strong, you 
probably were not able to pull them with the rope wrapped twice 
around the broom handles. The broom handles that you used were 
the pulleys that a rope wrapped around. When you wrapped the rope 
around the pulleys two more times, you decreased the effort needed 
to pull the load. By increasing the distance over which the force was
 applied, it took less effort to move the load. Now you could move both 
your friends!
A moveable pulley like the one you made with broom handles does not 
change the direction of the force. The load moved in the direction 
that you pulled.
Machines that use both fixed and moveable pulleys are called combined
 pulleys. A fixed pulley changes the direction of the force. One or 
more moveable pulleys multiply the amount of force acting on the load,
 so less effort is needed for lifting.

A crane has moveable pulleys with hooks that attach to the load that is 
being raised. It also has fixed pulleys attached to the crane arm 

Wheel and Axle 
Walk along any city street and you see wheels on cars, trucks, buses, 
and bicycles. Wheels help people travel from place to place. Grip a
 doorknob or turn a faucet, and you are also using wheels that allow 
you to do work with less effort.
Most wheels are attached to an axle that goes through the wheel and 
moves along with it. A wheel and axle is a type of simple machine. A 
wheel and an axle turn together, so a force that is applied to one 
moves the other.


Big wheels help a heavy tractor move across a field 

Less distance, more force
A wheel and axle works in the same way as a lever. The center part 
of an axle is the fulcrum around which the wheel rotates. As it 
rotates, the outer edge of the wheel travels a greater distance 
than the axle in the center. The axle moves less distance and turns 
with greater force.
Try turning a screw with a screwdriver. You grip the screwdriver
 handle the wheel and the shaft in the center the axle turns the screw. 
The outside of the screwdriver moves a greater distance than the shaft, 
so the shaft turns with greater force. A wheel and axle can change a small
 force into a larger one.

A wheel and axle can also work to increase the distance that is traveled. 
A motor spins the axle of a fan, and the attached blades move farther, 
pushing air. When the axle of a Ferris wheel is turned, people riding 
in cars attached to the edge get an exciting ride.

Easy rolling
When two objects rub against each other, they create friction. Friction 
is a force that slows objects down. If you pull a large box across the 
floor, the bottom drags against the floor, and friction slows the 
movement. Place the box on a cart, and only the wheels touch the ground. 
There is less friction, so it takes less effort to move the box.

Turning the handle of a screwdriver makes the shaft move with more force 

Wheels at work
For this activity you will need:
A ruler
A rubber band 
A roller skate, a skateboard, a tricycle, or a wagon
Paper and a pencil

Steps to follow

Attach the rubber band to the front of the roller skate or other 
wheeled object
Measure and record the length of the attached rubber band.
Pull the skate by the rubber band, with its wheels on the ground. 
Measure and record the length of the rubber band as you pull.
Put the skate on its side and pull the skate again. Measure and 
record the length of the rubber band as you pull.

How does it work?
You probably found that the rubber band stretched farther when the 
skate was on its side. The rubber band stretched farther because it
 took more force to drag the skate without wheels. Wheels reduce the 
amount of force needed to move the skate by reducing friction. Instead 
of the entire surface of the skate rubbing against the ground only the 
bottom of the wheels touched the ground.

Where do you use wheels?
Wheels and axles on bicycles, scooters, skateboards, wagons, and cars 
make it easier for us to move people and things. We also use many other 
types of wheel and axles for work and play. Look in your kitchen for 
wheels such as stove dials, rolling pins, and fans. Faucet handles, 
wrenches, and screwdrivers are wheels that increase force when they 
are turned. Gears are also wheels, with teeth meshed together to 
transmit force. Your kitchen clock and eggbeater might have gears. 
Take a close look at a CD spinning in a CD player and you will see a
 wheel and axle at work. What other wheels can you find?

Gears inside a clock move the clock hands

Ancient wheels
The wheel is one of the world's oldest inventions. The first wheels 
were probably logs used as rollers under heavy loads. About 7,000 years 
ago, people in Mesopotamia used potter's wheels to shape clay pots.
 Carts with solid wooden wheels were used about 6,000 years ago. People 
also made water wheels that lifted water from streams to use for 
irrigation.

Make a wheel and axle
For this activity you will need:
One square piece of paper, 15 cm  15 cm (6 in.  6 in.)
A pencil
Scissors
A ruler
A hole puncher
Thread
A paper clip
Sticky tape

Steps to follow
Draw two diagonal lines from one corner of the square paper to the 
opposite corner. The lines should cross in the center of the paper. 
Mark each line 2.5 cm (1 in.) from the center.
Cut along the lines from the corners, stopping at the marks.
Punch a hole in the upper left corner of each flap. With a pencil point, 
make a hole of the same size through the center (where the lines meet).
Curl up the corner holes, so they meet at the center hole. Push the straw 
through all five holes, and slide the pinwheel to the center of the straw.
Put a ring of tape around the straw, on each side of the pinwheel. 
The tape will keep the pinwheel in the center while still allowing it 
to spin.
Cut a piece of thread about 30 cm (12 in.) long. Tie the thread to one 
end of the straw, about 4 cm (1.5 in.) from the edge. Tape the thread 
loop securely to the straw, so it will not slide. Tie a paperclip to 
the other end of the thread.
Hold both ends of the straw loosely between your fingers. Blow on the 
pinwheel, allowing it to spin. What happens to the paperclip?

How does it work?
Notice how turning the pinwheel moves the axle (the straw), since 
both are attached. The spinning axle winds the thread, raising the 
paperclip. Since the wheel turns a greater distance than the axle, 
the force with which the axle turns is increased. It has enough force
 to raise the paper clip.
A windmill works in a similar way to your pinwheel. Wind turns the 
blades of a windmill, moving a vertical shaft with great force.
Windmills were once used to grind grain and pump water. Modern wind 
turbines turn wind power into electricity.


The blades of a windmill are fixed to an axle that turns with great 
force 

Many Machines Make One
Simple machines help us do work by changing the size or direction of a 
force. Most machines are more complex than a simple machine. A machine 
that consists of two or more simple machines working together is called 
a compound machine

Bike wheels
How many simple machines combine to make a bicycle go? The first 
simple machine you might notice on a bike is the wheel and axle.
Only a small surface of a bicycle wheel touches the ground, reducing
 friction. Bicycle wheels look very different from the solid wooden 
wheels that moved carts thousands of years ago. Spokes make them 
strong but light. Each spoke is like a lever turning around the 
fulcrum at the center of a wheel.
Look closely at a bike to find other wheels. Gears are wheels that 
have tiny teeth on them. The gears of a bike change the amount of force
 needed to pedal the bike with the distance turned. In a high gear, the 
chain moves to a smaller rear gear wheel and the rear wheel turns faster. 
The chain moves only a short distance to turn the wheel. It is harder to 
push the pedals, but the bike goes farther with each turn of the pedals.
 In a low gear, the chain moves to a larger rear gear wheel and the rear 
wheel turns more slowly. It takes less effort to push the pedals, but 
the bicycle travels a shorter distance. The teeth on the gears are 
another simple machine. They are wedges that mesh with the chain.

How many wheels are on this bicycle? 

Bike levers
Can you find any levers on a bike? The arms that the pedals attach 
to are levers that turn a pulley. To stop a bike, you pull on brake
levers. Brake levers attach to another set of levers by a cable. The 
second set of levers pull the rubber brakes against the wheels. The 
levers that you pull with your hand move a farther distance than the
 levers pulling the brakes, so the force is increased. So, what we think 
of as one machine, a bicycle, in fact contains many different types of 
simple machines.

Screws hold the parts of a bicycle together 

