the story of jumping mouse
a native american legend retold and illustrated 




Once there was a young mouse who lived in the brush near a great river. During the day
he and the other mice hunted for food. At night they gathered to hear the old ones 
tell stories. The young mouse liked to hear about the desert beyond the river, and he 
got shivers from the stories about the dangerous shadows that lived in the sky. But 
his favorite was the tale of the far-off land.
The far-off land sounded so wonderful the young mouse began to dream about it. He 
knew he would never be content until he had been there.  The old ones warned that the
journey would be long and perilous, but the young mouse would not be swayed. He set 
off one morning before the sun had risen.
It was evening before he reached the edge of the brush. Before him was the river; on 
the other side was the desert. The young mouse peered into the deep water. “How will 
I ever get across?” he said in dismay.
“Don't you know how to swim?” called a gravelly voice. The young mouse looked around 
and saw a small green frog. “Hello,” he said. “What is swim?” “This is swimming,” said
the frog, and she jumped into the river. said the young mouse, “I don't think I
can do that.” “Why do you need to cross the river?” asked the frog, hopping back up 
the bank. “I want to go to the far-off land,” said the young mouse. “It sounds too 
beautiful to live a lifetime and not see it.” “In that case, you need my help. I'm 
Magic Frog. Who are you?” “I'm a mouse,” said the young mouse.
Magic Frog laughed. “That's not a name. I'll give you a name that will help you on 
your journey. I name you Jumping Mouse.” As soon as Magic Frog said this, the young 
mouse felt a strange tingling in his hind legs. He hopped a small hop and, to his 
surprise, jumped twice as high as he'd ever jumped before. “Thank you,” he said, 
admiring his powerful new legs. “You're welcome,” said Magic Frog. “Now step onto 
this leaf and we'll cross the river together.” When they were safely on the other 
side, Magic Frog said, "You will encounter hardships on your way, but don't despair.
You will reach the far-off land if you keep hope alive within you."
Jumping Mouse set off at once, hopping quickly from bush to bush. The shadows circled
above, but he avoided being seen. He ate berries when he could find them and slept 
only when he was exhausted. Days passed. Though he was able to travel quickly, he
began to wonder if he'd ever reach the other side of the desert. He then came upon a
stream that coursed through the dry land. Under a large berry bush he met a fat old 
mouse. 
"What strange hind legs you have," said the fat mouse. "They were a gift from Magic
Frog when she named me," said Jumping Mouse proudly. snorted the fat mouse. 
"What good are they?" "They've helped me come this far across the desert, and with
luck they'll carry me to the far-off land," said Jumping Mouse. "But now I'm very 
tired. May I rest here for a while?" "Indeed you may," said the fat mouse. "In 
fact, you can stay forever." "Thank you, but I'll stay only until I'm rested. I've
seen the far-off land in my dreams and I must be on my way as soon as I'm able."
"Dreams," said the fat mouse scornfully. "I used to have such dreams, but all I
ever found was desert. Why go jumping about the desert when everything anyone needs
is right here?" Jumping Mouse tried to explain that it wasn't a question of need, but
something he felt he had to do. But the fat mouse only snorted again. Finally Jumping
Mouse dug a hole and curled up for the night. The next day the fat mouse warned him
to stay on this side of the stream. "A snake lives on the other side," he said. "But
don't worry. He's afraid of water, so he'll never cross the stream."
Life was easy beneath the berry bush, and Jumping Mouse was soon rested and strong.
He and the fat mouse ate and slept and then slept and ate. Then one morning, when he
went to the stream for a drink, he caught sight of his reflection. He was almost as
fat as the fat old mouse! "It's time for me to go on," thought Jumping Mouse. "I 
didn't come all this way to settle down under a berry bush."
Just then he noticed that a branch had gotten caught in the narrow of the stream. It
spanned the water life a bridge-now the snake could cross! Jumping Mouse hurried back
to warn the fat mouse. But the mouse hole was empty, and there was a strange smell in 
the air. Snake. Jumping Mouse was too late. "Poor old friend," he thought as he 
hurried away. "He lost hope of finding his dream and now his life is over."
Jumping Mouse traveled throughout the night, and the next morning he saw that he had
reached a grassy plain. Exhausted, he hopped toward a large boulder where he could
rest in safety. But as he got closer, he realized the boulder was an enormous, shaggy
bison lying in the grass. Every once in a while it groaned. Jumping Mouse shivered at 
the terrible sound. "Hello, great one," he said bravely. "I'm Jumping Mouse and I'm
traveling to the far-off land. Why do you lie here as if you were dying?" "Because I 
am dying," said the bison. "I drank from a poisoned stream, and it blinded me. I can't
see to find tender grass to eat or sweet water to drink. I'll surely die."
Jumping Mouse was sad to see so wondrous a beast so helpless. "when I began my
journey," he said, "Magic Frog gave me a name and strong legs to carry me to the 
far-off land. My magic is not as powerful as hers, but I'll do what I can to help you.
I name you Eyes-of-a-Mouse."
As soon as he had spoken Jumping Mouse heard the bison snort with joy. He heard but he
could no longer see, for he had given the bison his own sight.
"Thank you," said Eyes-of-a Mouse. "You are small, but you have done a great thing. If
you will hop along beneath me, the shadows of the sky won't see you, and I will guide 
you to the mountains." Jumping Mouse did as he was told. He hopped to the rhythm of 
the bison's hooves, and in this way he reached the foot of the mountains.
"I am an animal of the plains, so I must stop here," said Eyes-of-a-Mouse. "How will
you cross the mountains when you can't see?" "there will be a way," said Jumping Mouse.
"Hope is alive within me." He said good-bye to this friend; then he dug a hole and 
went to sleep. 
The next morning Jumping Mouse woke to cool breezes that blew down from the mountain
peaks. Cautiously he set out in the direction of the coolness. He had not gone far 
when he felt fur beneath his paws. He jumped back in alarm and sniffed the air. Wolf!
He froze in terror, but when nothing happened he gathered up his courage and said,
"Excuse me. I'm Jumping Mouse, and I'm traveling to the far-off land. Can you tell
me the way?" "I would if I could," said the wolf, "but a wolf finds his way with his
nose, and mine will no longer smell for me." "What happened?" asked Jumping Mouse.
"I was once a proud and lazy creature," replied the wolf. "I misused the gift of 
smell, and so I lost it. I have learned not to be proud, but without my nose to tell
me where I am and where I am going, I cannot survive. I am lying here waiting for the
end." Jumping Mouse was saddened by the wolf's story. He told him about Magic Frog 
and Eyes-of-a-Mouse. "I have a little magic left," he said. "I'll be happy to help
you. I name you Nose-of-a-Mouse."
The wolf howled for joy, Jumping Mouse could hear him sniffing the air, taking in the
mountain fragrances. But Jumping Mouse could no longer smell the pine-scented breezes.
He no longer had the use of his nose or eyes. "You are but a small creature," said
Nose-of-a-Mouse, "but you have given me a great gift. You must let me thank you. Come,
hop along beneath where the shadows of the sky won't see you. I will guide you through
the mountains to the far-off land."
So Jumping Mouse hopped to the rhythm of the wolf's padding paws, and in this way he
reached the far-off land. "I am an animal of the mountains, so I must stop here," said
Nose-of-a-Mouse. "How will you manage if you can no longer see or smell?" "There will
be a way," said Jumping Mouse. He then said good-bye to his friend and dug a hole and
went to sleep.
The next morning Jumping Mouse woke up and crawled from his hole. "I am here," he
said. "I feel the earth beneath my paws. I hear the wind rustling leaves on the trees.
The sun warms my bones. All is not lost, but I'll never be as I was. How will I ever
manage?" Then Jumping Mouse began to cry. "Jumping Mouse," he heard a gravelly voice
say. "Magic Frog, is that you?" Jumping Mouse asked, swallowing his tears. 
"Yes," said Magic Frog. "Don't cry, Jumping Mouse. Your unselfish spirit has brought
you great hardship, but it is that same spirit of hope and compassion that has 
brought you to the far-off land."
"You have nothing to fear, Jumping Mouse."
"Jump high, Jumping Mouse," commanded Magic Frog.
Jumping Mouse did as he was told and jumped as high as he could. Then he felt the air
lifting him higher still into the sky. He stretched out his paws in the sun and felt
strangely powerful. To his joy he began to see the wondrous beauty of the world above
and below and to smell the scent of earth and sky and living things. "Jumping Mouse,"
he heard Magic Frog call. "I give you a new name."
"You are now called Eagle, and you will live in the far-off land forever."












