susan anthony fighter for freedom and equality


When Susan Anthony was young, white men had more rights than other people. 
Susan believed everyone should have equal rights. As an adult, she shared her 
ideas about equality.
She gave many speeches. She started a newspaper. She worked to change laws. In 
doing so, Susan changed the lives of all Americans. This is the story of Susan 
Anthony.

Susan was born in Adams, Massachusetts, in . Her parents belonged to the 
Quaker religion. Quakers believed that everyone was equal. They also thought 
that it was important for
their children to learn. Susan learned to read when she was just years old. 
Her grandmother taught Susan and her sisters. 

As a child, Susan saw that boys and girls were treated differently. Only boys 
were allowed to sit in the front rows at school. Also, girls were left out of 
important lessons. Susan
told her father she wanted an equal chance to learn. He turned part of their 
house into a school. There, all children were treated the same. 

Susan began teaching when she was. Five years later, she took a teaching 
job in New York. She was paid a week. The teacher who had the job before 
Susan was a man. He earned
a week. Susan thought men and women should get the same pay for the same 
work. 

In 1846, Susan became the head mistress of a school called Canajoharie Academy 
in New York. Although she enjoyed her job, she kept thinking about how women 
were treated unfairly.
Women were only allowed to do certain jobs, such as teach or work in factories. 
Husbands got all the money their wives earned. Women could not vote or own 
property. They could not
even wear pants. 

Susan left her job at Canajoharie in 1849. She returned to her parents' home, 
where she took charge of the family farm. She also started to work on an important 
issue.
Susan joined the temperance movement. People in this movement believed that 
alcohol caused many problems. For example, they thought men who drank too much 
alcohol were unkind to 
women. 

in Susan met Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Elizabeth was a writer, and she had 
strong ideas about helping women. Susan and Elizabeth became good friends. They 
worked together to
teach others about equality. Susan began to travel around the country, speaking
 and marching in protests. Elizabeth wrote many of Susan's speeches.

The Civil War began in 1861. As the United States fought over slavery, Susan 
spoke out about why all people should be free. She helped get 400,000 people to 
sign a petition against
slavery. This petition showed support for the 13 amendment to the  
Constitution. The amendment freed all slaves. It was approved by the states after 
the Civil War ended in 1865.
Petition to end slavery liberty 

After the Civil War, Susan returned to her battle for women's rights. She fought 
with her words, giving about 200 speeches each year. Susan traveled around the 
country in wagons and
trains. She spoke in barns, schools, and cabins. Her travels were difficult, with 
little time for rest. Still,  Susan kept speaking. 

In 1868, Susan and Elizabeth Cady Stanton started a newspaper. They called it 
The Revolution. The paper shared many of Susan's ideas, including the idea that 
women and men should get
equal pay for equal work, Susan also pushed to win women the right to vote. 
Due to Susan's bravery and hard work, many people slowly began to change their 
minds about how women should be treated. Susan fought for women's rights until she 
died in 1906.
votes for women    help us to win the vote

The life for Susan Anthony:
1820- born on February 15 in Adams, Massachusetts
1846- Became the head mistress of Canajoharie Academy and earned $110 per year
1849- Left Canajoharie Academy and returned home
1851- Met Elizabeth Cady Stanton
1865- Helped to pass the 13 Amendment, which freed all slaves
1868- With Elizabeth cady Stanton, started a newspaper called The Revolution
1872- Arrested for voting in Rochester, New York
1906- Died at her home in Rochester on March 13 at age 86

Did you know?
-Susan came from a large family. She had four sisters and two brothers.
-Even though women were not allowed to vote, Susan went to a voting place in New 
York in 1872. She was arrested and fined $100. Susan Never paid that fine.
-During her 86 birthday party in Washington Susan gave a famous speech during 
which she said "Failure is impossible"
-One of Susan's dreams came true after her death. In 1920, the 19 Amendment was 
added to the Consititution and women were given the right to vote. People call it 
the Susan
Anthony Amendment.
-Susan was the first woman to appear on a coin. Silver dollar coins showing 
Susan's face were made in 1979, 1980, 1981, and 1999. These coins honored Susan 
and her work for
women's rights.