Teammates

Jackie Robinson was more than just my teammate. He had a tremendous amount of
talent, ability, and dedication. Jackie set a standard for future generations of
ballplayers. He was a winner. Jackie Robinson was also a man.
-Pee Wee Reese
October 31, 1989

Once upon a time in America, when automobiles were black and looked like tanks and
laundry was white and hung on clotheslines to dry, there were two wonderful baseball
leagues that no longer exist. They were called the Negro Leagues.

The Negro Leagues had extraordinary players, and adoring fans came to see them 
wherever they played. They were heroes, but players in the Negro Leagues didn't
make much money and their lives on the road were hard.

Laws against segregation didn't exist in the 1940. In many places in this country,
black people were not allowed to go to the same schools and churches as white 
people. They couldn't sit in the front of a bus or trolley car. They couldn't drink
from the same drinking fountains that white people drank from.

Back then, many hotels didn't rent rooms to black people, so the Negro League 
players slept in their cars. Many towns had no restaurants that would serve them,
so they often had to eat meals that they could buy and carry with them.

Satchel Paige White Only

Life was very different for the players in the Major Leagues. They were the leagues
for white players. Compared to the Negro League players, white players were very well
paid. They stayed in good hotels and ate in fine restaurants. Their pictures were 
put on baseball cards and the best players became famous all over the world.

Babe Ruth
Lou Gehrig
Ty Cobb
Ted Williams

Klan Rides again in east Tennessee
crosses burned in terror episodes
senator eastland tried to shake hastie at hearing 
Dixie to Wipe Job Slavery
924 race clashes reported in texas
will not action in colored

many Americans knew that radical prejudice was wrong, but few dared to challenge
openly the way things were. And many people were apathetic about racial problems. 
some feared that it could be dangerous to object. Vigilante groups, like the
Ku Klux Klan, reacted violently against those who tried to change the way blacks
were treated.

Branch rickey

The general manager of the brooklyn dodgers baseball team was a man by the name of
Branch Rickey. He was not afraid of change. He wanted to treat the Dodger fans to 
the best players he could find, regardless of the color of their skin. He thought
segregation was unfair and wanted to give everyone, regardless of race or creed,
an opportunity to compete equally on ballfields across America.
To do this, the Dodgers needed one special man. 

Branch Rickey launched a search for him. He was looking for a star player in the
Negro Leagues who would be able to compete successfully despite threats on his life
or attempts to injure him. He would have to possess the self-control not to fight
back when opposing players tried to intimidate or hurt him. If this man disgraced
himself on the field, Rickey knew, his opponents would use it as an excuse to keep
blacks out of Major League baseball for many more years.

Rickey thought Jackie Robinson might be just the man.  

Jackie rode the train to Brooklyn to meet Mr. Rickey. When Mr. Rickey told him, 
"I want a man with the courage not to fight back," Jackie Robinson replied, 
"If you take this gamble, I will do my best to perform." They shook hands. Branch
Rickey and Jackie Robinson were starting on what would be known in history as
"the great experiment."

At spring training with the Dodgers, Jackie was mobbed by blacks, young and old, 
as if he were a savior. He was the first black player to try out for a Major 
League team. If he succeeded, they knew, others would follow.

Initially, life with the Dodgers was for Jackie a series of humiliations. The 
players on his team who came from the South, men who had been taught to avoid black
people since childhood, moved to another table whenever he sat down next to them. 
Many opposing players were cruel to him, calling him nasty names from their dugouts.
A few tried to hurt him with their spiked shoes. Pitchers aimed at his head. And
he received threats on his life, from both individuals and from organizations like
the Ku Klux Klan.

Despite all the difficulties, Jackie Robinson didn't give up. He made the Brooklyn
Dodgers team.

But making the Dodgers was only the beginning. Jackie had to face abuse and hostility
throughout the season, from April through September. His worst pain was inside. 
Often he felt very alone. On the road he had to live by himself, because only the
white players were allowed in the hotels in towns where the team played. 

The whole time Pee Wee Reese, the Dodger shortstop, was growing up in Louisville,
Kentucky, he had rarely even seen a black person, unless it was in the back of a
bus. Most of his friends and relatives hated the idea of his playing on the same 
field as a black man. In addition, Pee Wee Reese had more to lose than the other 
players when Jackie joined the team.

Jackie had been a shortstop, and everyone thought that Jackie would take Pee Wee's 
job. Lesser men might have felt anger toward Jackie, but Pee Wee was different. He
told himself, "If he's good enough to take my job, he deserves it."

When his Southern teammates circulated a petition to throw Jackie off the team and
asked him to sign it, Pee Wee responded, "I don't care if this man is black, blue,
or striped"- and refused to sign. "He can play and he can help us win," he told the
others. "That's what counts."

Crosley Field

Very early in the season, the Dodgers traveled west to Ohio to play the
Cincinnati Reds. Cincinnati is near Pee Wee's hometown of Louisville.

Indiana Ohio Kentucky Cincinnati Louisville

The Reds played in a small ballpark where the fans sat close to the field. The
players could almost feel the breath of the fans on the backs of their necks.
Many who came that day screamed terrible, hateful things at Jackie when the
Dodgers were on the field.

More than anything else, Pee Wee Reese believed in doing what was right. When 
he heard the fans yelling at Jackie, Pee Wee decided to take a stand. 

With his head high, Pee Wee walked directly from his shortstop position to where 
Jackie was playing first base. The taunts and shouting of the fans were ringing
in Pee Wee's ears. It saddened him, because he knew it could have been his friends
and neighbors. Pee Wee's legs felt heavy, but he knew what he had to do. 

As he walked toward Jackie wearing the gray Dodger uniform, he looked into his 
teammate's bold, pained eyes. The first baseman had done nothing to provoke the
hostility except that he sought to be treated as an equal. Jackie was grim with 
anger. Pee Wee smiled broadly as he reached Jackie. Jackie smiled back.

Stopping beside Jackie, Pee Wee put his arm around Jackie's shoulders. An audible
gasp rose up from the crowd when they saw what Pee Wee had done. Then there was
silence.
Outlined on a sea of green grass stood these two great athletes, one black, one 
white, both wearing the same team uniform. 
"I am standing by him," Pee Wee Reese said to the world. "This man is my teammate."





































