the incredible book eating boy


Henry loved books. But not like you and I love books, no. Not quite.

...Henry loved to eat books.

It all began quite by mistake one afternoon when he wasn't paying attention.
He wasn't sure at first and tried eating a single word, just to test.
Next, he tried a whole sentence and then the whole page.
Yes, Henry definitely liked them. By Wednesday, he had eaten a whole book.
yellow pages
works ordered returned 
switchgear
mains

And by the end of the month he could eat a whole book in one go. 
The incredible book eating boy

Henry loved eating all sorts of books: storybooks, dictionaries, atlases,
joke books, books of facts, even math books. But red ones were his favorite.

And he was going through them at a fierce rate.


moby dick
trigonometry
game theory
i love math
the hunt for red october
section 

But here is the best bit: The more he ate, the smarter he got. 
book goes in
information goes to brain [brain getting bigger]
belly gets full
rodney's great adventure and other chicken stories 
intellectualism
intellectuality
intelligence 

He ate a book about goldfish and then he knew what to feed Ginger.
monumental
before long he could do his father's crossword in the newspaper, and was even
smarter than his teacher in school.  board of education
intemperance  

Henry loved being smart. He thought that if he kept going, he might even become the
smartest person on Earth.
the smartest person on earth

map
So he kept eating books...
And he kept getting smarter...
and smarter...
polar bears    the quiz show
...and smarter.
He went from eating books whole to eating them three or four at a time. Books about 
anything.
Henry wasn't fussy, and he wanted to know it all.

But then things started going not quite so well. I'm going to eat you! of monsters
In fact, they started going, very, very wrong. Henry was eating too many books, and 
too quickly at that.

bite chew chew chew gulp green greener greenest boke best quiche best quiche 
He was beginning to feel a little ill. 
an Irish word for ejecting the contents of your stomach.

But here is the worst bit. Everything he was learning was getting mixed up...
he didn't have time to digest it properly. It became quite embarrassing for him to 
speak. elephant cat dog 

pick me
i know
miss
i know i know
i know
miss
miss me
Suddenly Henry didn't feel very smart at all.

More than one person told him he should stop eating books. 
A practical, handbook on elocutions
no more books
your head and belly can't cope
besides, it means no one else can enjoy them
you owe a total of... prace 

more than one person told him he should stop eating books
a practical handbook on elocution

so, henry gave up eating books, and sat sadly for a long time. What
was he to do?

Then, after a while, and almost by accident, Henry picked up a half-eaten book 
from
the floor. But instead of putting it in his mouth...
Henry opened it up...

...and began to read. and it was so good. christmas 

Henry discovered that he loved to read. And he thought that if he read enough he 
might
still become the smartest person on Earth. 
It would just take a bit longer.
the incredible broccoli eating boy
now henry reads all the time... although every now and then



























