The Water Cycle

Water covers the earth. When seen from space the earth is a swirl of blue oceans and white clouds. Water covers 70 percent of the earth. Clouds form when water rises into the air as vapor. water falls as rain or snow. Water moves and changes as part of the water cycle. Fact people call the earth the water planet. the water cycle. Water changes as it moves through the water cycle. Water evaporates as it changes from a liquid into a gas. Water vapor condenses to form clouds. Precipitation falls from clouds as rain and snow. The sun's heat turns liquid water back into vapor. The water cycle begins again. condensation precipitation evaporation Evaporation. Water evaporates when it changes from a liquid to a gas. The sun's heat makes water evaporate. People can't see water vapor. Vapor can only be seen when it is mixed with water drops. We can see vapor as steam when water boils. Humidity. Humidity is the amount of water vapor in the air. Humidity changes with the temperature. Warm air holds more water vapor than cold air. People feel warmer on humid days because sweat does not evaporate quickly. Fun fact your hair is longer on humid days. water vapor makes hair heavier. Condensation. Condensation takes place when water changes from a gas into a liquid. Vapor turns into drops as air cools. We can see condensation as dew drops on leaves. Condensation drops also slide down a glass of ice water. Fun fact raindrops are not shaped like tears. raindrops are balls that get wider as they fall. Clouds. Clouds form when water vapor condenses. Water vapor condenses onto specks of dust. These drops stick together to make clouds. Clouds grow heavy with water as condensation takes place. Dark clouds are filled with water. Rain is on the way. Precipitation. Water falls from clouds as precipitation. Rain falls when clouds fill with water. Frozen water falls as snow sleet or hail. Precipitation recharges water on the earth. Rain seeps into the soil to restore water in the ground. It flows over land. It fills rivers lakes and oceans. 
An endless cycle. Water always flows and changes. Water from oceans lakes and rivers evaporates under the sun. drops of water vapor stick together to make clouds. Water returns to the earth as rain and snow. The water cycle never ends. Fun fact scientists have names for 26 different types of clouds. Amazing but true. The water people drink is the same water dinosaurs drank millions of years ago. The earth's water is about 3 billion years old. The water cycle keeps water on the planet. In the years to come people plants and animals will also use the same water. Hands on water cycle cups. Water is the only substance found in nature as a liquid a solid and a gas. Try this activity to see how water changes into its different forms as part of the water cycle. What you need 2 clear plastic cups hot tap water ice cube. What you do. Fill one plastic cup with about 1 inch 2.5 centimeters of hot tap water. Quickly place the second cup upside down on top of the first cup. Make sure that the rims of the cups are 
connected. Place an ice cube on top of the stacked cups. Look for the different states of water in the water cycle. Water vapor rises into the top cup. The ice cools the air so tiny droplets form. As the drops get bigger they fall back into the cup like rain.