the scoop on clothes homes and daily life in colonial america 





Many cultures, one land
The people of colonial America were a strange mix. Colonists came from many countries, including
England, the Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, and France. Their customs varied as much as their
languages. Some colonists came seeking adventure. Others, like those at Jamestown, Virginia, 
hoped to get rich through trade. The Pilgrims who settled in Plymouth, Massachusetts, wanted 
religious freedom. In America, colonists also met American Indians. Dozens of tribes lived on
America's east coast. Each tribe was unique. The Iroquois were as different from the Algonquins
as the English were from the Swedes. In 1619 the first Africans arrived in America. These people
didn't come by choice. Slave traders forced them into slavery. Their numbers increased slowly.
By 1675 about 5000 Africans lived in the colonies. Custom- a tradition in a culture or society
Throughout the colonial period (1607-1776), European colonists, American Indians, and African 
slaves learned from one another. They exchanged ideas to create homes, clothing, and customs. 
This sharing of ideas resulted in a culture that became uniquely American. The 13 colonies, new
England colonies, middle colonies, southern colonies, american indians 

Algonquian, Iroquois, Shawnee, yuchi, 
Cherokee, Georgia, south Carolina, north Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, powhatan, secotan, 
Delaware, new jersey, Pennsylvania, Narragansett, new York, Connecticut, Rhode island, 
Wampanoag, Abenaki, new Hampshire, Massachusetts, Atlantic ocean, miles, kilometers, fast facts: 
not all slaves came from Africa. European slave traders also brought slave from the Caribbean
islands.

Chapter 1- Getting Dressed- you could tell a lot about colonists from the clothes they wore.
Farmers and laborers wore loose clothing made of cheap fabric so they could work comfortably. 
So did servants and housewives. Wealthy people wore fine fabrics designed to impress others. 
Their clothes were too fancy and too tight for work. Clothing styles varied from colony to 
colony. In the hot south, people wore lightweight cotton or linen clothes. In chilly New England
and the cooler middle colonies, people wore warm wool. 
Underwear-A colonist's outfit began with underwear. But underwear wasn't what you might expect.
All colonial men wore long-sleeved white undershirts that reached their knees. Women and children
wore shifts instead of shirts. A shift was a long-sleeved dress that fell below the knees. No one
bothered with boxers or briefs underpants weren't common in America until the 1830.
Stays-Women and children wore stays over their shifts. A stay was made of stiff pieces of 
whalebone, reeds, metal, or wood. They were sewn into a tight-fitting garment that went from
waist to chest. Stays forced women and children to stand straight. They also made it hard to
bend over or play. Many boys wore stays until age 6. Girls wore them all their lives. They even 
wore stays at night when sleeping. Fast fact: in colonial America, fancy clothes were known as
dress clothes. Everyday work clothes were called undress. Colonists wore their very best clothes 
to church.


Women and Children get dressed- Over their stays, girls and women wore several light skirts 
called petticoats. Over the petticoats a woman would wear a gown and apron. Women's gowns had 
long sleeves and skirts. Colonists considered elbows and ankles ugly, so they kept them covered. 
Women also wore neck cloths and caps. Wealthy women wore fancy hoop skirts. Hoops gave these 
dresses a rounded shape. But they weren't very practical. Hoop skirts made it impossible for
women to sit down! Babies and young children wore simple dresses. That's right, even boys wore
dresses. At about age 6, boys were "breeched." This custom meant they could finally ditch the
dresses for knee-length pants called breeches. No matter the weather, colonists dressed in 
several layers of clothes.
Men Get Dressed- All men wore breeches. But what they put on next depended on their jobs. A 
farmer would wear a sleeveless vest and a jacket. The jacket protected clothing from animals 
and dirt. Rich men strutted about in fancy coats made of brightly colored silk. In the 1700, it 
was also fashionable for wealthy men to wear wigs. Wigs were heavy, hot, and expensive. They were
made of human, horse or goat hair. The hair was tied with colored ribbons. Boys from wealthy 
families began wearing wigs when they were breeched. Anna Green Winslow, age 12 (written in 1772)
"I was dressed in my yellow coat, my black bib and apron, my [high-heeled] shoes,  a cap with 
blue ribbons on it, and a very pretty locket in the shape of a heart. I wore my new cloak and 
bonnet, gloves, and so on." Fast fact: colonial shoemakers made children's shoes at least two 
sizes too big. Children wrapped their feet in thick itchy wool until they grew into the shoes.


Buckskin leggings and buffalo robes- while colonists were sweating in layers of clothes, American
Indians went nearly naked. Their style was based on comfort and usefulness in daily life. Women 
wore skirts or dresses made of buckskin or mulberry bark. Most men wore breechcloths. Eventually,
some American Indian men adopted European styles. They wore hats, shirts, and blankets that they 
received from European fur traders. In winter both men and women added buckskin leggings for 
warmth. Buffalo, beaver, bear, or rabbit robes kept them cozy on cold days. The first colonists 
were shocked by how little clothing American Indians wore. Buckskin- a strong soft material made
from the skin of deer. Breechcloth-a piece of deerskin clothing that hangs from the waist and
passes between the legs
Not-so-fancy footwear- when it came to footwear, some native people went barefoot. Walking 
barefoot during childhood built up tough calluses on their feet. Calluses protected them from 
the pain of walking on pebbles, sticks, and prickly plants. Other American Indians wore moccasins.
These soft leather shoes were often attached with a strap around the ankle. Moccasins were 
comfortable to wear and protected feet from rough ground. Fast fact: many colonial men ditched
their dress clothes for native styles when they went hunting. This actor displays a buckskin 
shirt similar to those worn by colonists. These shirts protected colonists from prickly plants.
The tan color allowed them to blend into the forest.

Chapter 2- Choosing a home
When the colonists arrived, there were already villages in America. But these homes belonged to 
American Indians. In the cold northeast, Abenaki and Wampanoag people lived in wigwams. These 
small houses had arched roofs and wooden frames covered with bark. They were cozy in winter and 
cool in summer. Many Eastern Woodland Indians built longhouses. Up to 60 people lived in each 
wooden longhouse. People hung woven mats or wood screens to separate rooms. The Algonquian tribes
of the middle and southern colonies used wigwams and longhouses. Both could be built in a few
days, and they could last 10 years or more. The Iroquois surrounded their villages with 
protective walls called palisades.
First Colonial Homes-Some early colonists took over abandoned wigwams. Others tried to build 
their own. But English wigwams were not warm or weatherproof like Indian wigwams. The English 
structure had a door in one end and a fireplace in the other. Some settlers dug cellars 6 or 7 
feet (1.8 or 2.1 meters) into the ground for homes. Only the thatched roof showed above the 
ground. These houses were damp, dark, and dirty. The earth helped keep colonists warm. But it
also allowed bugs, mice, and snakes to skitter and slither in. Fast Fact: storms and fires were 
a constant danger. Strong winds could knock down simple houses. Straw roofs caught fire.
Thatched- made of woven straw


After the first few years, colonists built houses of logs, bricks, or stones. Brick was a great 
choice because it was durable and colonists could make it themselves. Brick makers made bricks 
by combining water, clay, and sand and baking them over a hot fire. An early colonial home was 
usually about 20 by 20 feet (6 by 6) in size. The walls were thin and had many cracks. The door 
was so small that visitors had to crouch to enter. There were no windows, so houses were dark. A 
fireplace provided a little heat and lots smoke. Soot covered everything. Fast fact: At night the
only light came from the fireplace or candles. Most people used tallow candles made of animal fat.
The candles smelled like rotten bacon.

Most houses had one main room, called a hall, where everyone gathered, ate, and slept. Sometimes 
there was a loft over the main room where children slept. A lucky family owned a table and one
chair. At night, they put a mattresses stuffed with straw, grass, or cornhusks on the floor as
beds. Colonial fireplaces were used for warmth, light, and for cooking. A visitor to a New Jersey
home in 1679 wrote: "the house was so poorly built that if you are not so close to the fire as to
almost burn yourself, you cannot keep warm, for the wind blows through everywhere." text has been changed for clarity

Mansions and plantations- by the 1700, New England merchants had built brick or stone mansions 
with many rooms and fine furniture. Houses were still cold because there was no insulations. Wind
seeped through the walls and roofs. To combat this chilly problem, every room had a fireplace. 
In the Middle and Southern colonies, the problem was not cold wind, but heat. Wealthy farmers 
lived on plantations. Plantation houses also had many rooms and fine furniture. High ceilings 
kept rooms cool in the hot, muggy climate. Large windows let in light and air. The kitchen was 
in a separate building to keep cooking odors and heat away from the main house. Fast fact: Thomas
Jefferson's Monticello and George Washington's Mount Vernon were colonial plantations. Many 
plantation homes had tall columns around the main entrance.
Slave huts- slaves cleaned, cooked, and polished furniture in elegant plantation houses. But 
they slept in simple huts with dirt floors. Some slave huts were made of bricks or wood. Others 
were African-style round huts with thatched roofs. But thatched roofs leaked. African huts didn't
last long in the South's wet winter weather. Bathrooms? Imagine you traveled back in time and 
asked a colonist where the bathroom was. They would probably hand you a pot or point you to an
outdoor shed. You see, no one- rich or poor- had indoor bathrooms. People used an outdoor toilet 
with a pit dug beneath it for waste to drop into. Anyone who couldn't go outside used a chamber 
pot. When the pot was full, colonists sometimes dumped it out the window. There was no soft 
toilet paper either. Colonists often wiped their bottoms with corncobs! There were two toilet 
options in colonial times- the pit or the pot. Insulation- a material that stops heat, sound, or
cold from entering or escaping. Plantation- a large farm in the southern colonies

Chapter 3-Working to live
Colonists didn't have any of the modern conveniences that we have today. Nothing came easy. 
They worked hard just to survive. Women's work Keeping up a colonial home was a woman's main 
job. Women and girls cared for children, prepared and preserved food, and worked in the gardens.
They knitted, mended clothes, made candles, and did laundry. Colonial housework often required
heavy lifting. Doing laundry often meant hauling heavy pails of water to the house. Women boiled
the water over a smoky fire and scrubbed filthy clothes by hand. They laid clothes on rocks or
bushes to dry, In New England, it was nearly impossible to do laundry in the winter. People wore
dirty, smelly clothes until the weather improved. 
Doing laundry required soap, but colonists couldn't buy it at a store. They had to make it. 
Making soap was a messy job. First, women and girls soaked ashes in water to make lye. Then 
they purified stinky cooking fat by boiling it over an outdoor fire. When they mixed the fat
with lye it became soap. Lye- a strong substance used in making soap and detergents. When the
pilgrims first landed in America, they did laundry on the shore.

Men's work- men and boys worked long hours outside the home. Whatever the job, they usually 
ended up very sweaty and dirty. Farmers cleared land, planted crops, cut trees, and built homes.
They tended animals and put up fences. Farmers did their work with simple tools.
Men also worked at different trades. Miller worked at mills grinding grain into flour. Carpenters 
built homes, barns, and other buildings. Blacksmiths fashioned metal into useful items like tools,
pots, and cooking utensils. There were also basket makers, cabinetmakers, shoemakers, and many 
more tradesmen. Boys were expected to help with work from a young age. Farm boys chopped firewood,
fed animals, and mended fences. By the time they were teens, many boys became apprentices to 
tradesmen. They worked with the goal of becoming tradesmen someday. Trade- a particular job or
craft, especially one that requires working with the hands. Apprentice-someone who learns a trade
or craft by working with a skilled person.

Chapter 4- fun and games
Community celebrations- American colonists were busy, but they still found time to celebrate. 
Births, weddings, and even funerals provided reasons for people to get together. Adults found 
ways to make work fun too. They got together for quilting bees and barn raisings. Colonists also 
held harvest festivals and celebrated New year's Day. Dancing was a fun part of many colonial 
wedding celebrations.
In the Southern colonies, people traveled great distances to go to plantation parties. The owners 
held dinner parties, dancing, and hunts. Parties might include horse racing, card playing, and a 
fancy dress ball. Slave musicians often supplied the music for plantation dance parties. Guests 
sometimes stayed for several days. Pinkster- each spring during the 1700, slaves from New York to
Maryland celebrated Pinkster. It began as a Dutch tradition during a religious holiday called
Pentecost. Dutch people gave their slaves time off to visit family on that day. Soon African-
Americans adopted the holiday as their own. They gathered in towns and cities to visit, play 
games, and dance. Many people sold items such as berries, herbs, and oysters at Pinkster markets. 
Fast Facts: In Virginia it was against the law to hunt, fish, play games on Sunday. Everyone was 
expected to be in church.

American Indian Games- American Indians valued celebrations too. Many tribes held footraces, 
swimming races, and other contests. In the winter, the Iroquois played the snow snake game. Men
competed to see who could throw a stick shaped like a snake the farthest. American Indians also 
enjoyed ball games. Several tribes played a game that involved kicking a leather ball against a 
post. It was almost like football. Child's play- When their chores were done colonial children 
found time to play. Boys made boats to float in streams. Girls played with dolls often made out 
of corncobs, sticks, or fabric. All children played with tops, puzzles, marbles, and balls. Many
colonial games are still played today. Hide-and-seek, hopscotch, and tag were favorites. Children
also sang "London Bridge" and "ring Around the Rosy."
In the southeast, Cherokee, Choctaw, and Creek boys played lacrosse. Each person used two sticks
to pass a deerskin ball back and forth. In the northeast, Iroquois used a single long stick to 
play the game. Lacrosse is still popular today throughout the United States and Canada. Newspaper
notice from Boston gazette, may 22-29, 1721: "there will be a pig run, for boys, at 9 in the 
morning. The boy who takes the pig and fairly holds it by the tail, wins the prize." American 
Indians had played lacrosse for hundreds of years before white people ever knew about the game. 

Chapter 5 One the move
Colonists took travel tips form the American Indians. American Indians had found ways to make 
travel easier in the American wilderness. They had created well-worn foot paths over hundreds of
years. American Indians used light canoes to travel easily over waterways. They also had tricks
for making travel easier in the winter. Snowshoes made it possible for people to walk on thick 
snow without sinking. Toboggans were useful for hauling supplies over snowy land. Before there 
were any roads, waterways provided the best travel routes. 
For the colonists, walking was faster than riding horses. Healthy men and women could walk about 40 
miles (64 kilometers) in 10 hours. The first horses were brought to the colonies from England in
1609. They were smaller than today's horses and needed to rest often. Traveling by horse-drawn 
carriage or wagon didn't work well anyway. The first colonial roads were made dirt. They were 
narrow and full of ruts. There weren't any bridges, either. Travelers had to find ways around 
rivers and streams or wade across them. Fast fact: In the 1750, the New York colony had only 57 
miles of roads. These dirt trails were just wide enough for one wagon. Snowshoe- a racket-shaped 
frame for walking on snow. Toboggan- a long, flat sled that curves up at one end. Wagon wheels 
carved deep ruts in colonial dirt roads.

Growing and Changing- Over time, colonists improved the roadways and bred stronger, larger 
horses, But even on better roads, carriages and wagons bounced over bumps and got stuck in mud. 
Travelers arrived at journey's end tired, dirty, and shaken up. By the end of the colonial
period, Boston, Massachusetts, was a bustling city.
During the colonial period, American Indians and colonists struggled to live together peacefully.
American Indians taught colonists many skills that helped them survive. But as more colonists 
arrived from Europe, land became scarce. American Indians were pushed west. By the mid-1700, the
colonists had built a foundation for the future. People lived in warm, sturdy houses. There was 
plenty of food thanks to farmers, fishermen, and hunters. There were stores, schools, and 
libraries. Life had changed in many ways, but even bigger changes were coming. Frustration
with British rule was growing. After fighting the Revolutionary War (1775-1783), the colonies
would be colonies no longer. They would become the United States of America. A complaint written
in 1778: "The main road has become so bad, as to greatly delay travelers. Trees have fallen 
across it and are not removed; the roots are not cut up; a number of crossing are swampy and 
full of holes; and many of the bridges are nearly impassable." Bred-when humans have purposely
mated animals to produce offspring with desired qualities.
