The Boy Who Loved Words


There are, in this world, people who are born collectors. Some collect shells or stones. Others, feathers. Some have even been known to collect tiny teaspoons. Such a one was Selig. He was a collector of words. 
Selig loved everything about words- the sound of them in his ears (tintinnabulating!), the taste of them on his tongue (tantalizing!), the thought of them when they percolated in his brain (stirring!), and, most especially, the feeling of them when they moved his heart (Mama!). 
Whenever Selig heard a word he liked, he'd shout it loud, jot it down on a slip of paper, then stuff it into his pocket to save. Such a collector! Selig's pockets positively brimmed with words. He stuffed new ones inside his shirt, down his socks, up his sleeves, under his hat. 
Electric Phenomenon Smooth Porous Luxury Rare Fragrant Beautiful Tantalize Obligation Earnest
Comfortable Gentle Compliment Gleaming Stirring Jot Melted Enchanted Cheerful Genuine
Whisper Continuous

While other children busied themselves with bats, nets, and all manner of balls, Selig stayed on the outskirts, always on the periphery- listening and collecting delicious words.
Deliberate shuffle swirl bubbling precision hit scoop swoop flying huddle dribble

His father, a practical man who sold sturdy shoes for a living, wondered what good could possibly come from a son with such a strange predilection. 
Meat predilection porker quality shoes comfort special

His mother, a large, lovely woman from the Old Country, worried- could her beautiful boy find happiness? Waving her arms in the air, she was a windmill of worry. 
Windmill rolled snooze quiet precious melting hoax mystify home luxurious beautiful brilliant nostalgia vibrant genuine

As time went on, people began calling Selig by a new name: Wordsworth. “Hey, Wordsworth,” kids would giggle. “Here's a word for your collection- oddball!” “Oddball!” Selig repeated. The silly-sounding word should have made him giggle, but instead it made him lonely.
Alone insulting buzz oddball cunning giggle 

One night, Selig had a dream… Alone, in front of an unusual emporium, he encountered an oversized amphora. Curious, Selig gave it a tap. Out popped a swarthy, swirling man. Selig exclaimed, then “Genie!” he shouted, enjoying the tang of tasty new words.  the Genie asked.  Such strange and savory sounds! Such an offer! At a loss for words, Selig suddenly knew his - it was for an answer. “Is it true, am I really… an… oddball?”  “Oddball? You are a lover of . Already you have people search their whole life for- an enthusiasm, a passion. you need now is a mission.” Then, without a word of warning, the Genie disappeared. Selig awakened from his dream… , he packed a rucksack with a pillow and blanket, apples, honey, cream soda, and his entire collection of words. He knew exactly what he had to do. Selig took to the road, determined to find his purpose. 
Silky rigid emporium velvet mystical genie passion rugged magical oddball dream swirl glowing

On the trail of his purpose, Selig's senses sharpened. He noted the nod and toddle of tulips in the wind; the sway and swagger of tree branches; how, at evening, the light dimmed to announce the arrival of twilight and stars. Dusk, Selig noted, adding that short and enchanting word to his collection. 
Nod good serene toddle swagger music enchantment determined jovial graceful vitally healthy tender resilient sparkling soothing breezy dusk

But in time Selig's steps grew heavy. Under the weight of so many words, it was harder and harder to move. He was shuffling and shambling when he might have been rambling and ambling. Perhaps what he needed to do was lighten his load. But HOW? Throw words away? Waste them? Impossible! They were far too precious!
Selig was too tired to think. His exhausted brain could imagine but one thing- slumber, a splendid word! Sadly, he was too sleepy to write it down. 
In front of Selig stood a large and lovely tree. He removed his jacket, stuffed like his mama's, with words. Tenderly, he hung each word on its own separate branch, as if putting it to bed for the night. 
Oddball smug nod dusk cradle mama sway creak passion toddle swoopy ambling handle swirl lozenge lemon muzzle licorice cozy

With a sip a cream soda and a nibble of honeyed apple, Selig clambered, then curled in a crook of the tree. Snug, he thought, and fell directly to sleep. Comfortably cradled there, he dreamed of his mama, his mission, and- his favorite cookie. 
Nod cradled passion toasty snug mission enthusiasm savory comfort snug

During the night, a pacing poet, unable to sleep for want of a word, found himself under the same tree, gazing hopelessly at the moon. Night after night, he'd been struggling to find the right words to describe it. 

Suddenly, mysteriously, a swirling wind blew up. Four of Selig's words sailed off their branches. Reaching skyward, the distracted poet caught them. Discarding the word, he held tightly to lozenge, lemon, and licorice. “The moon,” he wrote in his notebook, growing more and more excited with each word, “melted like a lemon lozenge in the licorice sky.” “My stars!” the poet shouted, exultant. “That's it!”
Lemon, licorice, lozenge 

The following morning Selig awoke to what could only be called a rhapsody of birds and words. The poet was reading his newest poem aloud- a poem chockablock with Selig's words!
The moon melted like a lemon lozenge in the licorice sky rhapsodizing

Wiping the sleep crumbs from his eyes, Selig scrambled down the tree and saluted the poet. “Your poem,” he told him, “contains some of my favorite words. How beautifully you use them.” “Why, thank you! For once, the words just seemed to come to me. Upon my word! How lucky I am. What, may I ask, is your name? I should like to dedicate my poem to you.” For a moment, Selig hesitated. Then, suddenly, for the first time ever, he proudly proclaimed, “They call me Wordsworth.” It was then that Selig realized his mission. It was to spread the word, sharing his words with others!

From that day forth, Selig's steps were light and filled with purpose. Ever the collector, he added new words as it pleased him. But now, whenever her felt word-heavy, he discovered the ideal places to sprinkle, disburse, and broadcast them. 
Luscious morsels delicious crispy crunchy

In that way, a baker whose pastries had always been ignored found his shop filled with a mob of hungry customers. When the baker's back was turned, Selig on a break, had tossed some of his favorite words into the air. Crispy and crunchy landed next to the. Scrumptious fell against a loaf of pumpernickel. Luscious leaned against a layer cake. “Upon my word! How lucky I am!” the baker exclaimed when he turned back and saw his voracious new customers.
Fresh scrumptious voracious
Neighbors realized they were bickering when the words fuss, and rained down on them… and stopped their fighting. Selig watched them grow still and gaze kindly upon one another after he cast hush, harmony, and chum in their direction
slips nag threaten envy fuss bigwig vicious resentment failure accused comfort love chum hush satisfy harmony cooperative

And so, by word of mouth, the legend began… “It's Wordsworth,” people would whisper, when suddenly, the right word occurred to them. “HE is near,” they would nod, knowingly. “Upon my word! How lucky we are!”
Adore wisdom masterpiece apologies

Years passed. Selig was a man now, also a myth. But while he was delighted in his work, he found that, once again, he was lonely. “Solo,” he sighed. 
Solo myth twisted alone tottering nod fresh sprinkled virtuous reliable cleverness smooth muzzle comfort twist tangled inspire passion fuss intricate inconspicuous ingenious soggy distinctive gleam verse hush


One day, after launching the words limber, spry and gusto toward an aging, unhappy man, Selig heard a sound on the breeze. A single, pulsing, marvelous, note floated through the air and found its way straight into his heart. “mellifluous!” he exclaimed.
Boyish young and supple limber gusto spry marvelous mellifluous musical pulsing

Pursuing that perfect note, Selig found a young woman seated by a lake, playing a lute. Suddenly, his heart was aflutter. Tremulously he asked, “ I have a word with you? is your name?” “They call me Melody,” the woman sang out. The music of her voice, combined with the charm of her words, was, to Selig, the sweetest of all songs. 
Marvel aflutter tremulously magnificient magnetic fascinating harmonized Melody musical 

It was love at first listen. Together, they journeyed back to Selig's hometown, to his mother and father. What a reunion! How his mother smiled when she saw them! Worried that they looked thin, she cooked Selig's favorite foods-  plum crumble, and of course. To comfort their tired feet, Selig's father cobbled the couple his sturdiest shoes. 
Exquisite delicious plum crumble mouthwatering sumptuous reunion satisfied

Rested and restored, Selig resumed his life's work, joyfully gathering and scattering words on the wind. Since then, word by word, legions of lucky people have discovered and delighted in them. You too may find yourself lucky if, one day, while you are thinking or writing or simply speaking, the perfect word just seems to come to you. If so, you'll know that Selig is near. And on special days, if you feel like humming or suddenly bursting into song, you'll know that Melody is with him. “Upon my word,” you may say. “How lucky I am!”
Scattering sprinkle spectacular relieve genuine superior rolling strolling upon my word how lucky I am ample rare vibrant
