The Water Cycle.


The water planet. Look at all the blue parts on earth. they are water. earth is sometimes called the water planet because it has so much water. almost all the water on earth is in oceans. there is also water in lakes ponds rivers and streams. there is even water under the ground. we need water. without water there would be no living things on earth. all living things need water to survive. plants cannot grow without water. animals and people cannot live very long without water either. animals and people need to drink water to stay alive. these zebras are having a drink on a hot day. plants need water to stay alive. the roots of these plants take in water from the ground. vapor liquid solid. water is always changing. it changes when it is heated. it also changes when it is cooled. water vapor liquid and solid are the three forms of water. water vapor is a gas. when water is a liquid you can drink it. you can also swim in it. solid water is snow or ice. from liquid to vapor. when water is heated it changes to 
water vapor. you can see water vapor coming off water boiling in a kettle. on a cold day your breath also contains water vapor. from vapor to liquid. water vapor returns to liquid when the air around it cools. if you hold a cold glass near the steam from a kettle drops of water will form on the glass. liquid and solid liquid water becomes solid when it freezes. when snow or ice melts it becomes liquid again. snow and ice are solid water. the water cycle. water moves as it changes form. it moves from the ground up into the sky as water vapor. it then falls back down to earth as rain or snow. the movement of water into the air and back to earth is called the water cycle. around and around. the sun and wind move water. water becomes part of the clouds part of the ground part of plants animals and people and part of oceans. oceans contain water currents which also move water from place to place. it never stops. the water cycle never stops. water does not stay in one place. it moves from one part of the world to 
another. the next page shows the changes in the water cycle. water words the words in this box help explain how water changes form in the water cycle. condensation condensation takes place when water vapor meets cold air and changes into liquid. evaporation when water is heated and changes from liquid water to water vapor evaporation takes place. ground water water that is under the ground is called ground water. precipitation water that falls from the sky is called precipitation. rain snow hail and sleet are kinds of precipitation. transpiration plants absorb or take in water from soil. Transpiration takes place when plants let off water vapor through their leaves. the sun's rays heat the earth's surface. when the sun heats liquid water the water evaporates and changes into water vapor. eventually all water returns to the oceans. in the sky the water vapor cools and forms clouds. the wind blows water vapor into the sky. plants release water vapor into the air. water falls from the clouds as precipitation. 
water moves from place to place. water soaks into the ground and becomes ground water. heated by the sun heat from the sun warms earth and everything on it. the surface or top layer of water in oceans rivers and lakes warms the most. water evaporates from the surface and becomes water vapor. on a hot day a lot of water warms up. evaporation happens quickly in hot weather. in cool weather evaporation takes place slowly. the sun heats water when water is heated it evaporates evaporation happens quickly on a hot sunny day. into the air. water vapor is in the air all around you, even when you cannot see it. on a hot day the air may feel humid or damp. humid air contains a lot of water vapor. the wind lifts some water vapor high into the sky. it may also blow water vapor far from the place where it was liquid water.  sometimes you can see water vapor in the air. it is called mist. vapor to liquid. the wind carries water vapor high into the sky where the air is colder. when the water vapor becomes colder it changes from a gas into tiny drops of water. changing from a gas to a liquid is called condensation. condensation often happens high in the sky because cold air cannot hold as much water vapor as warm air can. try it yourself. you can watch condensation happen. pour very cold water into a glass. wait for a few minutes watching the glass closely. you will see drops of water form on the outside of the glass. where did they come from. they came from the air around you. when water vapor in the air met with the cold glass drops of water formed on the glass. the sun heats the air near earth. hot air rises up into the sky. high in the sky, the air is cold. water vapor condenses and forms tiny drops of water. morning dew without the sun's heat air is colder at night than it is during the day. water vapor condenses in the cold night air and covers earth with dew. dew is drops of water that form on cool surfaces during the night. the temperature at which dew forms is called the dew point. you can see drops of dew on this leaf. the tiny tree frog will drink some of the water. other animals also drink dew. up in the clouds. when tiny water drops bump into one another in the sky they form large drops. thousands of large drops may join together. when they do they form clouds. clouds can be many shapes and sizes. the way a cloud looks depends on the temperature of the air the direction of the wind and how high the cloud is in the sky. which cloud is which? people can predict or guess what the weather will be like by looking at the clouds. white wispy clouds are called cirrus clouds. cirrus clouds form high in the sky and usually mean there is little chance of rain. big puffy clouds are called cumulus clouds. cumulus clouds often form in the sky before thunderstorms. these thin clouds are cirrus clouds. cumulus clouds usually have flat bottoms and fluffy looking tops. fog is cloud that forms close to the ground. falling water. clouds that contain many water droplets may create precipitation. precipitation falls to the ground as rain snow hail or sleet. rain may fall to the ground in a light sprinkle or a heavy downpour. snow many fall as a few flakes or a big snowstorm. hail is made up of balls of ice called hailstones. hailstones can be as big as baseballs. sleet is precipitation that is a mixture of rain snow and hail. how precipitation forms. clouds that form low in the sky are made up of water drops. rain may form in these clouds. it takes hundreds of water drops to make a single drop of rain. when clouds form very high in the sky they are made up mainly of ice crystals. when many ice crystals join together they form a snowflake. the heavy snowflakes fall to the ground as snow. oceans and mountains. areas of land that are near oceans receive much more precipitation than do areas that are far from oceans. areas near mountains as shown below also receive a lot of precipitation. when clouds rise to pass over mountains they hit cold air. they cannot hold their water vapor in cold air. rain or snow then falls from the clouds. water in the 
ground. some precipitation that falls on land soaks into the soil. water that stays in the soil near the surface of the ground is called soil moisture. plant roots absorb soil moisture. the plants use water to grow. dry soil absorbs more water than does soil that is already wet. if the soil is already wet puddles form on the surface of the ground. animals drink water from the puddles. transpiration. water may remain as soil moisture for a short time or a long time. some soil moisture is absorbed by plants. as plants make food they release water through their leaves. the water evaporates and becomes part of the water cycle again. evaporation through plant leaves is called transpiration. releasing water a plant pulls water up through its roots and stem and into its leaves. the leaves have tiny holes called stomata. some water leaves the plant through the stomata. once it is outside the plant the water evaporates. these arrows show water evaporating from the leaves. stem soil water roots. ground water. some 
water in the soil trickles deep into the ground. this water is called ground water. eventually ground water collects in aquifers. aquifers are layers of rocks that are deep under the soil in the saturated zone. see page aquifers have tiny holes in them so they can absorb and hold water. eventually the ground water seeps out of the aquifers. it flows into rivers and streams. the water in this stream was once in underground aquifers. the unsaturated zone. there are spaces in the soil near the surface of the ground. the spaces in the soil are filled with soil moisture or air. there is always some air in the soil so it is not saturated or soaked with water. they layer of soil that contains both soil moisture and air is called the unsaturated zone. the saturated zone. some water flows deeper into the ground and becomes ground water. this water collects among soil and rocks. at a certain point so much water collects that the soil becomes completely saturated with water. this layer of the ground is called the 
saturated zone. in the saturated zone soil contains no air. water and air fill the spaces between the soil and rocks in the unsaturated zone. in the saturated zone ground water fills all the spaces between the soil and rocks. soil rocks unsaturated zone saturated zone. fresh water. ground water and the water in lakes and streams is fresh water. fresh water does not contain a lot of salt so it is safe to drink. many living things need fresh water to survive. fresh water is not just found in liquid form. more than two thirds of earth's fresh water is in the form of ice and snow. collecting water. people use fresh water for drinking cooking taking baths and washing clothes. to make sure there is enough water for everyone to use people collect and store fresh water. they store it in large tanks or reservoirs. a reservoir, shown below, is a human made lake. on the run. not all precipitation soaks into the ground. in some places the ground is too steeply sloped or too rocky to absorb water. saturated soil also 
cannot absorb water. some rain and melting snow trickles downhill over land. water that trickles over land is called runoff. runoff flows into lakes rivers and streams. runoff eventually ends up back in oceans just as all water does. runoff in cities. there is a lot of runoff in towns and cities because water cannot soak through pavement. most of the runoff flows into sewers. sewers are underground pipes that carry runoff to rivers lakes and oceans. some sewers carry waste as well. without sewers runoff might flood city streets. this ground cannot absorb any more water. the water that is not absorbed will become runoff. saltwater oceans. all runoff contains tiny bits of rocks and minerals. salt is one of the minerals it contains so runoff is slightly salty. water has been moving through the water cycle for millions of years. for all that time runoff has been carrying salty water to the oceans. that is why oceans contain salt water. ocean animals. millions of animals live in oceans. their bodies are perfectly suited to living in salt water. in fact if there was no salt water ocean animals would die. changing water. the water on earth today is the same water that was here long ago. the water is changing however. much of it is being polluted or made unclean by the actions of people. cars and factories produce poisonous chemicals and gases. some of these harmful poisons soak into soil and pollute the ground water. other chemicals become part of the air. when it rains or snows chemicals mix with the water and create acid rain. acid rain is precipitation that contains poisonous chemicals. it harms plants and animals and pollutes water in oceans rivers lakes and streams. warming oceans. some scientists believe that pollution causes earth to become warmer each year. warmer temperatures on earth then cause the oceans to become warmer. warmer oceans lead to changes in the weather. they create more rain and may also cause huge storms called hurricanes. hurricanes are fast moving wind storms that form over oceans. when the 
winds blow over land they lift ocean water onto land. on land hurricanes cause a lot of damage. even small changes in the temperature of oceans can cause plants and animals to die. you are water. earth is different from other planets because it contains water. water is everywhere and it is in everything. plants and animals are made mostly of water. rocks are shaped by water. the soil holds water. water moves. water runs in rivers crashes as mighty waves falls as gentle rain cascades as waterfalls drifts as delicate snowflakes rolls as blankets of fog and always returns to the ocean. we love water.  when we look into the sky we can see water in the clouds sometimes it falls on our faces as rain sometimes as snow we love water in all its different forms we love to drink it hot or cold we love to bathe and swim in it we love to ski over snowy hills and skate on slippery ice. when the sun shines through water in the air the water shows the colors of sunlight and a beautiful rainbow appears we especially love 
rainbows. we need water. most of earth is made up of water most of our bodies are made of water too. we are watery creatures living on a watery planet. without water our bodies could not work. our blood could not carry oxygen to our lungs our brains could not think. our bones would break. we could not eat every part of our bodies needs water. water keeps us alive. sometimes we forget how important water is to us we waste it or make it dirty we think we have more than enough but there is not much clean water left. we need to respect water we need to  be thankful for water we need to love water we need to remember that water keeps up alive. you are water. to show how you feel about water say these  words. i love you water i thank you water. i respect you water. and don't forget you are water
