the librarian of basra a true story of iraq written and illustrated


in the koran the first thing God said to Muhammad was read alia muhammad baker
from the new york times july 


Alia Muhammad Baker is the librarian of Basra, a port city in the sand-swept 
country of Iraq.

Her library is a meeting place for all those who love books. They discuss matters
 of the world and matters of the spirit.

Until now- now, they only talk of war.  
Will planes with bombs fill the sky? Will bombs fall here? Will soldiers with guns
 fill the streets? Who among us will die? Will our families survive? What can we 
do?

Alia worries that the fires of war will destroy the books, which are more precious 
to her than mountains of gold. The books are in every language- new books, ancient 
books, even a 
biography of Muhammad that is seven hundred years old. She asks the governor for 
permission to move them to a safe place. He refuses. 


So Alia takes matters into her own hands. Secretly, she brings books home ever 
night, filling her car late after work.

The whispers of war grow louder. Government offices are moved into the library. 
Soldiers with guns wait on the roof. Alia waits- and fears the worst.

Then... rumors become reality. 

War reaches Basra.

The city is lit with a firestorm of bombs and gunfire.

Alia watches as library workers, government workers, and soldiers abandon the 
library. Only Alia is left to protect the books.

She calls over the library wall to her friend Anis Muhammad, who owns a restaurant
 on the other side.  "Can you help me save the books?"

"I can use these curtains to wrap them." "Here are crates from my shop." "Can you 
use these sacks?" "The books must be saved."

All through the night, Alia, Anis, his brothers, and shopkeepers and neighbors 
take the books from the library shelves, pass them over the seven-foot wall, and 
hide them in Anis's 
restaurant.

The books stay hidden as the war rages on.

Then,  nine days later, a fire burns the library to the ground.

The next day, soldiers come to Anis's restaurant. "Why do you have a gun?" 
they ask. "To protect my business," Anis replies. The soldiers leave without
 searching inside. They do not
know that the whole of the library is in my restaurant, thinks Anis.

At last, the beast of war moves on. Alia knows that if the books are to be safe, 
they must be moved again, while the city is quiet. So she hires a truck to bring 
all thirty thousand 
books to her house and to the houses of friends.

In Alia's house, books are everywhere, filling floors and cupboards and 
windows- leaving barely enough room for anything else. 

Alia waits.

She waits for war to end. 

She waits, and dreams of peace.

She waits... and dreams of a new library.

But until then, the books are safe- safe with the librarian of Basra.

a note from the author
the invasion of iraq reached basra on april with the help of friends and neighbors
alia muhammad baker chief librarian of basra's central library managed to rescue
seventy percent of the library's collection before the library burned nine days
later. these events were first revealed to the world by the new york times reporter
shaila dewan who heard about alia and the library during a visit to anis muhammad's
restaurant the hamdan which is near the library and is known as one of the best in
basra shaila's translator said anis had an incredible story to tell about the war so
shaila made an appointment to talk with him. alia joined the discussion and together
they went on to share this amazing story. soon after the library was destroyed alia
suffered a stroke and had heart surgery but she is healing and despite all she is 
determined to see that the library is rebuilt