The Keeping Quilt

When my Great-Gramma Anna came to America, she wore the 
same thick overcoat and big boots she had worn for farm 
work. But her family weren't dirt farmers anymore. In New
York City her father's work was hauling things on a wagon,
and the rest of the family made artificial flowers all day. 
Everyone was in a hurry, and it was so crowded, not like in
backhome Russia. But all the same it was their home, 
and most of their neighbors were just like them. 

When Anna went to school, English sounded to her like 
pebbles dropping into shallow water. In six months she was
speaking English. Her parents almost never learned, so she
spoke English for them, too. 

The only things she had left of backhome Russia were her 
dress and the she liked to throw up into the air 
when she was dancing. 

And her dress was getting too small. After her mother had 
sewn her a new one, she took her old dress and. 
Then from a basket of old clothes she took Uncle Vladmir's 
shirt, Aunt Havalah's nightdress, and an apron of Aunt Natasha's. 
"We will make a quilt to help us always remember home," Anna's 
mother said. "It will be like having the family in backhome Russia 
dance around us at night." 

And so it was. Anna's mother invited all the neighborhood ladies. They
cut out animals and flowers from the scraps of clothing. Anna kept the 
needles threaded and handed them to the ladies as they needed them. 
The border of the quilt was made of Anna's. 

On Friday nights Anna's mother would say the prayers that started the Sabbath. 
The family ate and chicken soup. The quilt was the tablecloth. 

Anna grew up and fell in love with Great-Grandpa Sasha. To show he 
wanted to be her husband, he gave Anna a gold coin, a dried flower,
and a piece of rock salt, all tied into a linen handkerchief. 
The gold was for wealth, the flower for love, and the salt so their 
lives would have flavor. She accepted the. They were engaged. 

Under the wedding, Anna and Sasha promised each other love and
understanding. After the wedding, the men and women celebrated separately. 

When my Grandma Carle was born, Anna wrapped her 
daughter in the quilt to welcome her warmly into the 
world. Carle was given a gift of gold, flower, salt, and 
bread. Gold so she would never know poverty, a flower 
so she would always know love, salt so her life would 
always have flavor, and bread so that she would never 
know hunger. 

Carle learned to keep the Sabbath and to cook 
and clean and do washing. 
"Married you'll be someday," Anna told Carle, and.. 
again the quilt became a wedding, this time 
for Carle's wedding to Grandpa George. Men 
and women celebrated together, but they still did 
not dance together. In Carle's wedding bouquet 
was a gold coin, bread, and salt. 

Carle and George moved to a farm in Michigan and 
Great-Gramma Anna came to live with them. The quilt 
once again wrapped a new little girl, Mary Ellen. 

Mary Ellen called Anna, Lady Gramma. She had grown very old and was sick a lot 
of the time. The quilt kept her legs warm. 

On Anna's ninety-eighth birthday, the cake was a, 
a rich cake with raisins and candied fruit in it. 

When Great-Gramma Anna died, prayers were said to lift her soul to 
heaven. My mother Mary Ellen was now grown up. 

When Mary Ellen left home, she took the quilt with her. 

When she became a bride, the quilt became her. For the first time, friends who 
were not Jews came to the wedding. My mother wore a suit, but in her bouquet were 
gold, bread, and salt. 

The quilt welcomed me, Patricia, into the world... 
and it was the tablecloth for my first birthday party. 

At night I would trace my fingers around the edges of each animal 
on the quilt before I went to sleep. I told my mother stories about the 
animals on the quilt. She told me whose sleeve had made the horse, 
whose apron had made the chicken, whose dress had made the flowers 
and whose went around the edge of the quilt. 

The quilt was a pretend cape when I was in the bullring, 
or sometimes a tent in the steaming Amazon jungle. 

At my wedding to Enzo-Mario, men and women danced together. In my bouquet were gold, 
bread, and salt—and a sprinkle of wine, so I would always know laughter. 

Many years ago I held Traci Denise in the quilt for the first time. 
 

Three years later my mother held Steven John in the quilt for the 
first time. We were all so proud of Traci's new baby brother. 

Just like their mother, grandmother, and great-grandmother before them, 
they, too, used the quilt to celebrate birthdays and make superhero capes. 

As the years passed and Traci and Steven were growing up, 
their grandmother took pleasure at every family gathering 
to tell the story of the quilt. We all knew whose clothes made
each flower and animal. My mother was lucky enough to show to wonder 
of this quilt to my brother's grandchildren, her great-grandchildren. 

When my mother died, prayers were said to lift her soul to heaven. Traci and Steven 
were now all grown up and getting to start their own lives. 

Now, as my children grow, this quilt has become a part of their hearts. 

I decided to share its story with children everywhere, so I wrote a book to take 
with me on school visits for students to learn all about my family and traditions. 

In time my son promised his life to his bride under this quilt. I 
gave them both bread, so they would never know hunger; 
salt, so that their lives would always have flavor; flowers, so that 
they would know love; and, finally, a coin, so they would never be 
poor of spirit. 

When my daughter stood under this quilt to promise her heart to her 
partner, she too received bread, salt, flowers, and a coin. 

As the years passed, the Keeping Quilt became 
fragile. Without my knowing, my son and daughter 
took digital photos of the quilt and sent them to my 
sister-in-law and her quilting guild. 

The photos helped them make an exact pattern of the original. They 
even researched online to find the right fabrics to recreate the 
quilt. One heart from the original quilt was removed and added to 
the replica. 

They talked about their own families and traditions as they sewed. 

My children presented the new quilt to me as a complete surprise on my birthday. 

Then I made a very hard decision. With a bittersweet heart, I let the 
original Keeping Quilt leave my care to be on loan to the Mazza Museum 
at the University of Findlay in Findlay, Ohio. 

It warms my heart to know that so many people will see the Keeping 
Quilt on display. Hopefully it will stir the beauty of memory and the 
richness of family in their souls and they will take these feelings away 
with them. They will create legacies of their own. 
Now I take the new quilt to visit schools. Many hopeful brides and 
grooms have stood under it on their wedding day. It has covered many 
a table for special banquets. Children have run around, using it as a 
cape in the backyard. It has covered the coffins of those in our family 
whom we have loved and mourn.... 

But best of all this quilt has wrapped the most precious gifts 
of all ... new lives! 














































































































































