the reason for seasons

Spring. Summer. Autumn. Winter. These are the four seasons of the year.

The sun warms the surface of Earth, the planet we live on. 

The tilt of Earth in relation to the sun changes throughout the year. 
This is what makes the seasons. Sun Earth
Each season lasts about three months. 
Four seasons make a year. That's how long it takes for Earth to revolve, or make one trip, around the sun. 
As Earth circles the sun, different
parts of Earth are closer to the sun than others. 
This affects the amount of light and heat they receive. Earth Sun 

Earth is slightly tipped as it turns on its axis. It makes one full rotation on its axis every 24 hours as it moves around 
the sun. When the North Pole is tipped toward the sun and
the South Pole is tipped away, it is summer in the Northern Hemisphere and winter in the Southern Hemisphere.  

The north pole is the most northerly point on earth. spring autumn
the south pole is the most southerly point on earth. 
The earth's axis is the line that goes through earth joining the north and south poles. summer winter

Six months later, when earth has traveled to the other side of the sun and the north pole is tipped away, 
it is winter in the Northern Hemisphere and summer in the southern hemisphere.
The seasons of one hemisphere are always opposite of those in the other hemisphere. 

winter summer autumn spring North of the equator is called the northern hemisphere. 
South of the 
equator is called the southern hemisphere. The equator is the line that goes around Earth dividing the northern 
half of Earth from the southern half. 

Spring spring equinox also called the vernal equinox
In the Northern Hemisphere spring begins about March 21. 
This is the season when more sunshine causes cooler air to be replaced by warmer air. 
In the southern hemisphere autumn is
beginning. 
The first day of spring is called the spring equinox. When spring begins in the northern hemisphere, 
earth has moved along its path so that the sun is directly opposite the equator.
On this day, daylight and darkness are the same length of time over the entire earth. 
In ancient times some people celebrated this day because it was the beginning of the growing
season. 
migration
Spring is the season when some birds that have been away for the winter return again. 
this is called migration. some whales migrate too. some animals that slept all winter wake up and
look for food. spring winds are good for kite flying. 
it is the season when everything seems to come alive again. Trees grow new leaves and flowers bloom. 
some crops are planted. 

Slowly the days in the Northern Hemisphere become longer because that part of Earth is tilted more toward the sun. 
we see the sun higher in the sky. more direct sunlight reaches the
ground for longer periods of time. 
summer
summer begins in the northern hemisphere about june 21. the northern hemisphere is tilted more toward the sun 
than at any other time of year. it is the warmest season. in the southern
hemisphere winter is beginning. 
summer solstice
the first day of summer is called the summer solstice. it is the longest day of the year. on this day we see 
the midday sun at its highest point in the sky.
the hottest days of the summer take place after the summer solstice because earth keeps  absorbing more heat. 
flowers and plants grow under the warm sun. Many animals are busy 
raising new families.
In the summertime people have fun outdoors. They can go to a beach, swim in a lake or read under the shade of a 
big tree full of large green leaves. 
during summer daylight is long. we see the sun high in the sky. it might still be daylight at bedtime. 
the nights are shorter. 
Autumn
Autumn begins about September 21 in the northern hemisphere. it is the season when the air starts to get cooler. 
the leaves of some trees turn to beautiful colors and fall to the
ground, which is why some people call this season "fall." in the southern hemisphere spring is beginning. 
the first day of autumn is called the autumn equinox. when autumn begins in the north hemisphere earth has 
moved along its path so that the sun it directly opposite the equator again.
on this day, daylight and darkness are about the same length of time over the entire earth. since ancient times some 
people have celebrated this time of year because of autumn 
harvest. autumn equinox
some birds migrate to warmer climates. animals prepare themselves for the long cold season to come. 
children go back to school in many places. 
it is harvest season. farmers gather their crops. there are country fairs, too.
the air becomes cooler because the northern hemisphere is tilted farther away from the sun. 
the days grow shorter and the nights becomes longer. we see the sun lower in the autumn sky.
winter
in the northern hemisphere winter begins about December 21. this is the time of year the northern hemisphere 
is tilted farthest from the sun. it is the coldest season of the year. in
the southern hemisphere summer is beginning.
the first day of winter is the shortest day of the year. this is called the winter solstice. 
on this day we see the midday sun at its lowest point in the sky. in early times the first
day of winter was celebrated as a festival to honor light, to keep away darkness and to hope for the sun's return.
the coldest days of the winter come after the winter solstice because earth keeps losing the heat it gained in the summer. 
leaves are gone from most trees. there aren't as many birds.
some animals sleep all winter. this is called hibernation. often it is very cold. 
winter solstice hibernation


it may be time for ice skating, skiing and making snowmen. some people wear winter coats,  jackets, mittens and hats. 
sometimes it is nice to stay indoors. 
during winter, daylight is short and the nights are long. we see the sun low in the sky. sometimes it is dark even 
before dinner. 
areas near the equator have little temperature change during the year. these places are hardly affected by the tilt of earth. 
instead the seasons are marked by alternating rainy and
dry periods, two rainy and two dry seasons a year. each day at the equator daylight and darkness are almost always equal.
at the north pole and the south pole it is always cold. when a pole is tilted far away from the sun it is winter. 
during parts of the winter, the sun never appears over the horizon. 
it is always dark. when a pole is tilted closer to the sun it is summer. at times it is always light. 
spring
summer
autumn
winter
year after year the seasons repeat themselves. 
earth and its many relationships to the sun are the reasons for the seasons.
