the emperor's new clothes a tale set in china told 

Long ago in a province in China, there lived an emperor whose greatest pleasure in
life was to dress in new clothes.
Day and night in the winter, the palace spinners spun skeins of the smoothest silk
and the warmest wool. 
Day and night in the summer, the palace weavers wove cloth of the lightest linen 
and the coolest cotton. Day and night all year long, the palace tailors sewed gowns
and tunics and trousers and scarves.
And every few hours of every day, the palace dressers dressed the Emperor in a new 
set of clothes so that he might walk proudly among his people and be admired.


One fall day, two strangers-a woman and a man- arrived in the province. they claimed
to be the finest weaver and the finest tailor who ever lived. they were brought 
before the emperor. "Your Imperial Highness," the strangers said, "we have come to
offer you clothes no one else in the world has ever had." The Emperor was intrigued.
"what kind of clothes can these be?" he asked. "Clothes that are not only beautiful
to see and touch, but clothes that are woven and tailored with magic," said the woman.
"Magic?" the Emperor asked. "The clothes we make are so magical that only clever
people can see them. Fools cannot," replied the man.
"I must have those clothes!" the emperor declared. "I can wear them and see who in the
province is clever and who is a fool! You must make them for me at once!" So the 
woman and the man were paid and set up in the palace in their own workroom. And they
asked not to be disturbed.

swastika happiness 
peach immortality 
pear purity
pomegranate posterity
citron wealth
peace
endless knot endurance
longevity
ribbon  charm
lotus faithfulness
conch wisdom
umbrella charity
vase harmony
dragon wealth wisdom power
lion valor
deer longevity
fish wealth
phoenix empress
crane longevity
butterfly love and joy
unicorn benevolence
bat happiness
wheel infinity change
chrysanthemum joy fall
jade gong happiness
canopy spiritual authority
clouds fertility
rocks permanence
weed spirit of the waters
waves dragon's home
lotus purity
fungus immortality
pine longevity
fire male power
bamboo flexibility
plum hope winter
peony prosperity spring




After a while, when the land was frozen under winter ice and snow, the emperor became
curious about his new magical clothes. He sent his Imperial Minister to check on the
progress of the weaver and the tailor. When the Imperial Minister arrived in the 
workroom, the weaver was hunched over her empty loom and the tailor was snapping his
scissors through the air.

isn't this the finest cloth you've ever seen asked the woman
isn't this the most delicate brocade touched asked the man
the imperial minister was alarmed was he fool a
he could see nothing at all
the imperial minister couldn't be called a fool so he told the emperor that the cloth
he'd seen was the most beautiful and luxurious imaginable he pretended he had seen cloth more
magical than the plumage of a bird



The emperor was delighted with the Minister's report. After a while, when the land was
glowing again with spring, the Emperor became impatient about his new magical clothes.
He sent his High Chancellor to check on the progress of the weaver and the tailor.
When the High Chancellor arrived in the workroom, the weaver was struggling to carry 
a load of air and the tailor was sewing something with neither needle nor thread.
"Isn't this the most splendid fabric you've ever touched?" asked the woman. 
"Isn't it the most glorious design you've ever seen?" asked the man.

the high chancellor was astonished was he a fool he could see nothing at all
he couldn't be called a fool so the high chancellor told the emperor that the garments
he'd touched were the more graceful and exquisite garments imaginable he pretended 
that the clothing he'd seen was more magical than the colors of the rainbow


The emperor was overjoyed with the Chancellor's report. After a while, when the land 
was burning under the summer sun, the emperor decided to see the new magical clothes
for himself. The emperor, the High Chancellor, and the Imperial Minister arrived in
the workroom. The weaver curtsied and held up a hanger. "Your Highness, look at the
colors!" cried the Imperial Minister. The tailor bowed and held out his arms. "Your 
Highness, look at the style!" exclaimed the High Chancellor. 

the emperor was shocked was he a fool he could see nothing at all
he certainly couldn't be called a fool
he took off his clothes and pretended to put on the splendid new clothing one piece 
at a time then he turned and preened in front of the mirror. my new outfit is more
magical than all the stars in the sky he said

The Emperor decided to walk among his people and be admired. The Imperial Minister 
and the High Chancellor dared not admit they could see nothing on their Emperor, and
they prepared to accompany him on his walk.
The Emperor walked out into the province. The people were surprised. Were they fools?
Their Emperor was wearing nothing at all!
the people did not want to be called fools doesn't his highness look divine in those fine fabrics
they asked one another don't the colors of his clothes shimmer
doesn't he look like a star


"But he has nothing on!" a child called out. "The Emperor has no clothes!"
The Emperor heard the child. He knew who the fools were in his province. But he held 
his head high and continued to walk among his people.


