tom thumb 


Once upon a time, a baby boy was born to a farmer and his wife. 
They were very proud
of their new child.
He was so tiny that they called him Tom Thumb.
Tom was very clever and helpful, and very good company. 
He used to go and work in the fields with his father. 
They would load wood into the cart. When it was full, Tom whispered in the horse's
ear to guide it home.
One day, some circus people saw Tom standing in the horse's ear. "That's amazing!"
they said to each other. "He could be really useful in our circus!"
They offered to buy Tom from his father, but he refused. Tom, however, had other 
ideas. "Take the money!" he whispered. "It will help to fill the larder. Don't worry.
I'll find a way home!"
So Tom's father took the money, and Tom rode off on the circus owner's tall top hat.
As soon as they came to the circus, the man put his hat on the ground. Straight away,
Tom jumped off and ran away as fast as he could!
Tom hid in a mouse hole. The whole circus looked for him, but to no avail.
Tom decided to spend the night in a snail's shell. Before he went to sleep, he 
overheard two robbers plotting to break into a house. Tom thought that he would 
spoil their plan. "Hello!" he shouted to them. "I can help you!"
"How can a little thing like you help us?" sneered the robbers. "Simple!" said Tom.
"Just lift me up to the window, and I'll throw out whatever you want!"
The robbers put Tom up to the window, and he crept silently through the bars.
He found himself in the milk maid's bedroom. She was fast asleep. He shouted as 
loudly as he could, to wake her up. "What do you want me to steal?" he called to
the robbers. "Anything special?"
The noise woke up the maid, but she could not see Tom. She looked out of the window, 
and saw the robbers waiting in the shadows. Picking up a broom, she chased them far
into the night.
"At last!" thought Tom. "Time for a rest!" He found a hay loft, and settled down in
some dry, warm hay. Soon, he fell fast asleep.
He was woken roughly from his slumbers the next morning. It was time to feed the cow,
and the milk maid picked up the hay, with Tom inside it. The cow gobbled it all up!
Luckily, the cow's teeth missed Tom, but it was very cramped and dark in her stomach.
He did not despair, but used a bit of hay to tickle her throat, until she coughed him
out!
He had no sooner landed in the hay, than a wolf came along and gobbled him up! "I'm 
not sure which is worse," thought Tom. "The inside of a cow or the inside of a wolf!
But I think I can save myself a long walk." "Mr. Wolf!" he called out. "Can you hear
me?" "Yes, I can," answered the wolf. "But who are you? And where are you?"
"I'm your stomach," pretended Tom. "Listen to me, and I will take you to a place where 
you can eat and eat until I am full." All night, the wolf ran across hill and dale,
until it was outside Tom's house. "Here we are!" said Tom. "Climb in through that 
vent, and you will find as much food as you want!"
The wolf ate and ate, until it was morning. "Time to go!" shouted Tom, "or they'll
catch you!" The wolf tried to wriggle out backwards, but it had eaten so much food,
that it became stuck. "Spit me out!" called Tom. "Then you can escape." But still
the wolf could not budge!
All the commotion woke Tom's parents. "It's a miracle!" they shouted. "Our boy is 
back! We thought you were lost. Where have you been?" "Well," said Tom. "I've been in
a mouse hole, a robber band, a hayloft, a cow's stomach and a wolf's belly! Which 
reminds me, can you help my friend to escape?"
They pulled and pulled, until at last the wolf came free.
"Let's have breakfast," said Tom's parents, "while you tell us all about it. Did you
enjoy your great adventure?" "It was exciting," Tom laughed, "but it's very good to 
be home!"

biscuits
marmalade
eggs lemon pudding
cake