waiting for the biblioburro



On a hill behind a tree, there is a house. In the house, there is a  bed and on the bed is a
little girl named Ana, fast asleep, dreaming about the world outside and beyond the hill.

When Ana wakes up to the rooster's Papi is already at work on the farm and
Mami is busy in the garden. Ana bathes her little brother and feeds the goats and collects
the eggs to sell at the market. After breakfast, Ana and her mother walk down the hill. Ana
closes her eyes against the sun and wishes she was back in the cool of the house with her 
libro, her book.

Ana has read her book, her only book, so many times she knows it by heart. The book was a 
gift from her teacher for working so hard on her reading and writing. But last fall, her 
teacher moved far away, and now there is no one to teacher Ana and the other children in 
her village.

So, at night, on her bed in the house on the hill, Ana makes up her own stories and tells the
stories to her little brother to help him fall asleep. She tells him stories about make-believe
creatures that live in the forest and the mountains and the sea. She wishes for new stories to
read, but her teacher with the books has gone.

One morning, Ana wakes up to the sounds of tacatac! Clip-clop! and a loud 
When Ana looks down the hill below her house she sees a man with a sign that reads 
biblioburro With the man, there are two burros. What are they carrying?

Books Books! libros
Ana runs down the hill to the man with the sign and the burros and the books. Other children
run to him too, skipping down hills and stomping through the fields.

"Who are you? Who are they?" the children ask. The man says, "I am a librarian, a 
bibliotecario and these are my burros Alfa and Beto. Welcome to the biblioburro my biblioteca

"But, senor Ana says, "I thought libraries were only in big cities and buildings."
"Not this one," says the librarian. "This is a moving library." Then he spreads out his 
books and invites the children to join him under a tree.

"Once upon a time," the librarian begins, sharing the story of an elephant who swings 
from a spider's web. He reads from books with beautiful pictures, then helps the little 
ones learn their 
He sings, "..."finally, he says, "Now it's your turn. Pick out books and 
in a few weeks I will be back to collect them and bring you new ones."
"Me too?" asks Ana.
"Especially you," says the librarian with a smile.

So many cuentos While Alfa and Beto chomp the sweet grass under the tree, Ana picks up book
after book and finds pink dolphins and blue butterflies, castles and fairies, talking lions 
and magic carpets.

"Someone should write a story about your burros" Ana tells the librarian, rubbing Alfa's nose
and feeding more grass to Beto. 

"Why don't you?" he asks. Then he packs up the books, and is
off.  "Enjoy!" he calls to the children. "I will be back."

Ana runs up the hill to her house, hugging the books to her chest. She can't wait to share her
books with her brother, and that night she reads until she can't keep her eyes open any longer.

Each morning Ana does her chores and reads and looks out her window. She listens for the sounds
of Alfa and beto, but weeks pass and the librarian doesn't return.

"When will he come back?" she asks her mother, who smiles and says, "Go read, Ana."
"When will he come back?" she asks her mother, who smiles and says, "Go draw, Ana."
"When will he come back?" she asks her mother, who smiles and says, "Go write, Ana."
"When will he come back?" she asks her mother, who smiles and says, "Go to bed, Ana!"

One night, Ana dreams she is flying over her country on a butterfly's back. In her 
dream she crosses mountains and oceans and rivers and jungles, bringing stories everywhere
she goes. Stories fly from her mouth and fingers like magic, falling into the hands of the 
children waiting below.

When Ana wakes up she misses Alfa and beto and the biblioburro's books. She remembers 
that the librarian told her that she could write a book, and so, with paper and string and 
colored pencils, she does. 

Finally, just when Ana thinks she'll never see the Library again, she wakes up to 
and children yelling. She runs down the hill with her library books and a 
special surprise of her very own.

"I wrote this cuento for you," she says.
que bueno the librarian says and then he reads her story to the children under the tree.

When it's time to go, Ana's story is packed carefully on the burro's back, ready to be 
carried away, over the hills and through the fields to another child who is...
asleep on a bed, in a house, on a hill behind a tree, dreaming of Alfa and Beto and all the 
new stories the biblioburro will bring. 



author's note
how far would you go for a book how far would a 
librarian travel to bring a book to you

around the world there are many librarians and libraries that travel
long distances just like the biblioburro in kenya camel 
caravans deliver books to nomads in the desert in sweden stockholm's
floating library delivers books to islanders on book boats
in zimbabwe there is a donkey drawn mobile cart library in 
the united states bookmobiles started out as book wagons
this book was inspired by a particular librarian i was honored to 
get to know luis soriano bohorquez near la gloria colombia this
teacher and librarian delivers books to children who live in 
remote villages with the help of his two donkeys alfa and beto
luis's biblioburro program is an inspiration to us all





























