when marian sang


when marian sang the true recital of marian anderson the voice of a century
libretto by pam munoz ryan
staging by brian selznick
it was her range of notes that caused all the commotion
with one breath she sounded like rain
sprinkling high notes in the morning sun
and with the next she was thunder resounding
deep in a dark sky


No one was surprised that Marian loves to sing. After all, she listened to Father singing in 
the morning as he dressed. Mother often hummed while she worked in the kitchen. Sometimes
Marian and her little sisters, Ethel May and Alyse, sang songs all afternoon. 
Let us break bread together on our knees let us break bread together on our knees 
when I fall on my knees with my face to the rising sun Lord, have mercy on me.
However, her voice was distinct- strong and velvety and able to climb more than 
twenty-four notes. Everyone wanted to hear Marian sing. 

Alexander Robinson, the choir director at the Union Baptist Church in South Philadelphia, 
wanted to hear Marian sing even though she was not quite eight years old and sometimes
sang too loud. He asked her to perform a duet with her friend Viola Johnson. 
As Viola sang the high part and Marian sang the low, their harmony blended like a silk braid.
Dear to the heart of the Shepherd Dear are the sheep of His fold Dear 
is the love that He gives them Dearer than silver or gold.
Church folks started whispering and followed with out-and-out talking about Marian's 
remarkable gift. Neighboring churches heard the news and invited Marian to perform. One
advertisement said: "Come and hear the baby contralto, ten years old." And people came.

the lord is in his holy temple let all the earth 

When Marian sang, it was often with her eyes closed, as if finding the music within. 
Audiences heard not only words, but feelings too: spirited worship, tender affection, and
nothing short of joy. She was chosen for the celebrated People's Chorus, a hundred voices 
from all the black church choirs in Philadelphia. She was one of the youngest members and
had to stand on a chair so those in the back could see the pride of South Philadelphia. 

Her father was proud too, but protective. He didn't want anyone taking advantage of his child.
Father's love made Marian feel important. When he died after an injury at the Reading Terminal 
where he sold ice, tragedy filled Marian's heart and sometimes her songs.
Were you there when they laid Him in the tomb? Were you there when they laid Him in the tomb? 
sometimes it causes me to tremble, tremble, tremble  Were you there when
they laid him in the tomb?

Mother was happy for Marian's success but reminded her that no matter what she studied to 
take a little extra time and do it well. Marian didn't need extra encouragement when it came 
to singing. She practiced her part of each song and often learned all the other parts too. 
For her, music was serious business, and more than anything, she hoped to someday go to
music school. Church members promised tuition for "Our Marian" if she was accepted.

Since Father's death,  marian worked odd jobs and sang in concert programs in order to help 
support her family. It wasn't until 1915, when marian was eighteen, that she finally went
to a music school and patiently waited in line for an application. But the girl 
behind the counter helped everyone except Marian. Was she invisible? Finally, the girl said, 
"We 
don't take colored!" Her voice sounded like a steel door clanking shut.
music school
Marian knew about prejudice. She had seen the trolley drive past her family as they stood at 
the corner. She knew that her people were always the last to be helped in a store. But
she could not understand how anyone who was surrounded by the spirit and beauty of music 
could be so narrow-minded. She felt sick in her stomach and in her heart. Didn't they know
that her skin was different but her feelings were the same? Couldn't she be a professional 
singer if she was Negro? With unwavering faith, Mother told her that there would be another
way to accomplish what would have been done at that school. Marian believed her mother. 
She took voice lessons in her own neighborhood,  continued with the choirs, and sometimes 
performed at Negro churches and colleges.

When Marian saw a Metropolitan Opera performance of the tragic opera Madame Butterfly, 
thoughts of a formal music education again came to mind. How wonderful it would be to sing on
a grand stage act out a dramatic role, and wear beautiful costumes. The passionate music 
inspired her and she was determined to study. But opera was simply the sun and moon- a dream
that seemed too far away to reach.
He's got the wind and the rain in His hands
He's got the sun and the moon right in His hands
He's got the wind and the rain in His hands
He's got the whole world in His hands. 

As a young woman in her twenties, Marian was invited to many states to sing. 
Sometimes she traveled with her accompanist by train where they were seated in the dirty and 
crowded
Jim Crow car reserved for Negroes. When she arrived at her destination, she often sang the 
same program twice, to separate audiences- one white and one black- or to segregated 
groups, whites in the best seats and blacks in the balcony. Many times, she was welcomed 
enthusiastically by her audiences, and then could not get a hotel room because she was a 
Negro. No matter what humiliations she endured, Marian sang her heart with dignity. 
Her voice left audiences weeping or in hushed awe as they strained to hold on to the memory of
every opulent note. 
When Israel was in Egypt's Land
Let my people go
Oppressed so hard they could not stand 
let my people go
go down moses
way down in Egypt's land
tell  Pharaoh 
to let my people go.
colored waiting room

Marian still wanted to advance her singing with master teachers. With the help of friends, 
she was granted an audition with the fierce yet famous Giuseppe Boghetti. When she arrived
at his studio, Mr. Boghetti announced that he didn't have time or room for new students. 
Too afraid to look at him, Marian took a deep breath. Slowly, with great emotion, she sang,
"Deep river, my home is over Jordan
Deep river, Lord, I want to cross over
into campground
Don't you want to go to that gospel feast
that promised land where all is peace?
deep river, Lord, I want to cross over
into campground."
Marian finally lifted her eyes. "I will make room for you right away." 
Mr. Boghetti said firmly,  "and I will need only two years with you. After that, you will be 
able to go anywhere
and sing for anybody." Again, Marian's devoted church community raised the money for her 
lessons.

Marian worked hard with Mr. Boghetti, and sometimes, for practice, she sang scenes from 
Italian operas with him. Her recitals now included German songs too,  but other languages
troubled her. She didn't want to simply sing beautiful works like 
She wanted to know that the words meant Dark, how dark in the woods and the fields! 
Other Negro singers had gone overseas to develop their voices and learn foreign languages.
Why not her? After all, Europe was different. There, she would be able to sing to mixed 
audiences and travel without the restrictions put on her people in America. Marian needed to 
grow and Mother agreed. A bundle of trepidation and excitement, Marian boarded the France 
in October 1927. She had never been so far from her family. She knew her sisters would take
good care of Mother, but still she already felt twinges of homesickness.

Sometimes I feel like a motherless child
sometimes i feel like a motherless child
sometimes i feel like a motherless child
a long ways from home. a long ways from home. 
sometimes I feel like i'm almost gone
sometimes i feel like i'm almost gone
sometimes i feel like i'm almost gone
a long ways from home. a long ways from home. 

Marian studied and was eventually invited to perform in concert halls in Norway, Sweden, 
Finland, and Denmark. The enthusiasm for her singing was so overwhelming that one newspaper
in Sweden called it "Marian Fever." Audiences applauded in London, cheered in Paris, and 
pounded on the stage for encores in Russia. In Austria, the world-famous conductor, Arturo
Toscanini, announced that what he had heard, one was privileged to hear only once in a 
hundred years.

Marian felt as if she had finally achieved some success. 
She even asked Mother if there was anything she wanted that would make her happy because 
now Marian could afford to buy it
for her. Mother said that all she wanted was for God to hold Marian in the highest of His 
hands. it seemed like she was already there. Mr. Boghetti had been right. 
She could go
anywhere and sing for anyone...

...Until she came home to the United States. In 1939, Howard University in Washington, 
booked a concert with Marian Anderson and began looking for an auditorium big enough to 
hold 
the audience she attracted. They decided that the 4,000-seat Constitution Hall would be 
perfect. But the manager of the hall said it wasn't available and no other dates were offered
because of their white performers only policy. Marian's agent, Sol Hurok, wrote to the hall 
manager, pointing out that Marian Anderson was one of the greatest living singers of our
time. But it did no good. 

Enraged fans wrote letters to the newspaper. In protest, Eleanor Roosevelt, 
the first lady of the United States, resigned from the organization that sponsored 
Constitution Hall. 
Howard University then tried to reserve a large high school auditorium from an all white 
school. Again, they were denied. Now teachers were angry and marched in support of Marian in
front of the Board of Education. Washington, was a boiling pot about to spill over. 
Wasn't there someplace in her own country's capital where Marian Anderson's voice could be 
heard?

constitution

Committees formed and held meetings. Finally, with President Roosevelt's approval, 
the Department of the Interior of the United States government invited Marian to sing on the 
steps 
of the Lincoln Memorial on Easter Sunday. Her country was offering her a momentous invitation, 
but she had concerns. Would people protest? Was it dangerous? Would anyone come?
Examining her heart, Marian realized that although she was a singer first and foremost, 
she also had become a symbol to her people and she wanted to make it easier for those who 
would follow her. She said yes. Standing in the shadow of the statue of Lincoln, waiting to be 
called out, she read the engraved words: ...This nation under God shall have a new 
birth of freedom...

Marion looked out on a river of 75,000 people. Her heart beat wildly. 
Would she be able to utter one note? She took a deep breath and felt the power of her 
audience's goodwill surge
toward her. Marian's sisters were there, and Mother too. Marian stood straight and tall. 
Then she closed her eyes and sang,
"My country 'tis of thee
Sweet land of Liberty
Let freedom ring
A roaring cheer followed every song. At the end of the program, the people pleaded for more. 
When she began her thought-provoking encore,
nobody knows the trouble I see
Nobody knows my sorrow..."
...silence settled on the multitudes.

For almost sixteen years after the Lincoln Memorial performance, Marian sang for kings and 
queens, presidents and prime ministers, famous composers and conductors. She received
medals, awards, and honorary degrees for her magnificent voice. 
But there was still one place Marian had not sung. When she was finally invited, 
a dream came true. Marian wondered
how people would react. No Negro singer had ever done such a thing. She would be the first. 
But she didn't need to worry. After she signed the contract, someone said, "Welcome home."
On opening night excitement charged the air. As Marian waited in the wings, the orchestra 
began. Her stomach fluttered. She walked onto the grand stage. Trembling, she straightened 
her costume and waited for the pounding music she knew to be her cue. 
Tonight was her debut with the Metropolitan Opera. At long last, she had reached the sun and 
the moon. The
curtains parted and marian sang 

encore genius like justice is blind for genius has touched with the tip of her wing this
woman she has endowed marian anderson
with such voice as lifts any individual above his fellows as is a matter of exultant pride to any
race secretary of the interior harold ickes at the lincoln memorial concert 

from the author after the publication of amelia and eleanor go for a ride 
brian selznick and i 
discussed how that book had prompted so many 
people to tell us their own eleanor roosevelt stories
brian mentioned that his uncle had confided a story 
too one that involved eleanor roosevelt marian anderson and the lincoln memorial concert
i was immediately intrigued
i love spirituals gospel music musicals and opera when i was in junior high i sang in an all
city honor chorus like many people i knew a little 
about marian anderson most specifically about her lincoln memorial concert
after brian's mention i began researching and and became fascinated by the depth
of her talent
i felt as if i'd been introduced to someone who was 
a kindred spirit to other characters about whom 
i'd written 
charlotte parkhurst in riding freedom
amelia earhart and eleanor roosevelt and esperanza 
in esperanza rising all women who overcame 
society's limitations and whose stories 
deserved to be told. 

marian anderson was someone for whom all americans
especially children could be proud
 i wanted more people to know her 
inspiring story it was with that passion and conviction 
that i set out to write this book
by when marian was she had been singing in hundreds of 
venues in the united states but it was the lincoln memorial concert that attracted the attention of the nation  constitution hall 
in washington run by the daughters of the american revolution had allowed 
other african americans to 
perform there in the past but there had been issues 
about seating when black and white 
patrons attended the solution was to accept only white performers

even with secretary of the interior harold ickes' pleas to 
the in support  of marian anderson 
the board of management voted to not to make 
an exception for her

marian was an uncomfortable activist unlike many who formed 
committees and spoke out against this incident 
marian was hesitant to make statements 
and preferred to find other ways to respond to the injustice but 
this event became symbolic of much that was 
wrong in our country at that time 

and even eleanor roosevelt took action she wrote to the 
i feel obliged to send in to you my resignation 
you had an opportunity to lead in an enlightened
way and it seems to me that your organization has failed
on february in her syndicated my day column 
mrs. roosevelt announced her resignation

in her autobiography my lord what a morning marian anderson calls
eleanor roosevelt one of the most admirable human beings i have
ever met
marian and eleanor became friends and sometimes 
their paths crossed in unlikely places where marian was 
singing and eleanor was speaking 

once a stage manager told marian that mrs. roosevelt would be at the same theater a few 
days after and would occupy the same dressing room in friendship
marian left her a welcome message on the mirror written with a bar of soap

marian did not harbor bad feelings against  the she always indicated
that the group should not be blamed for what she felt was the 
influence of a few
in three years after she had been banned the invited marian to 
sing at constitution hall on behalf of the war effort 
she said yes but only if the seating was mixed the agreed to marian's request
it was the first time in constitution hall's history that blacks and
whites sat together

at times marian was criticized for not taking  a stronger stand against segregation but 
she felt 
it was also extremely important to have a black role
model to represent accomplishments for her people 
as a compromise she sometimes insisted on 
vertical seating this meant an invisible line was
drawn down the middle of a concert hall 
whites on one side and blacks on the 
other so there would be an equal amount of all types of seats for 
both races by influenced by activist and her own conscience
marian began to insist that she would perform 

only for mixed audiences she remained dedicated to making the 
road easier for other african american singers
and her success did pave the way 


marian anderson sang in eight languages she performed
three times on the steps of the lincoln memorial
first in again in at the memorial 
service for secretary of the interior harold ickes 
who had introduced her on the first 
occasion and almost years later in at the march on washington for jobs
and freedom with martin luther king jr. in she was 
appointed to the united nations delegation she sang 
at the inaugurations of presidents 
dwight eisenhower and john 
kennedy and was the recipient of the 
NAACP's  NAACP NAACP spingarn medal 
the kennedy center honors and the 
presidential medal of freedom 
the  highest civilian award in america at her 
metropolitan opera debut 
in verdi's un ballo in maschera the masked ball
she was years old her voice still rich and abundant

marian was married to orpheus fisher a new york architect 
they had no children but she was very close to her   nephew james depriest
a composer and symphony orchestra conductor family faith
and music remained strong threads in her life 
especially the influence of her mother's belief in 
the ultimate goodness of people's hearts
all her life marian sang her soul her rendition of were you 
there when they crucified my lord can make
the most callous weep the angst of an era
the yearning for people to learn to accept 
and the unfailing hope for 
humankind were all there in her voice 
and the world heard it when marina sang

from the illustrator my uncle richard selznick 
was the family storyteller while i was working on amelia and eleanor go for a ride
i brought some of my photographic research to my little cousin's house because she was working 
on a report about eleanor roosevelt for school. the photograph shown here of eleanor roosevelt presenting
marian anderson with the spingarn medal was among them. when my uncle saw this picture he said
i knew both of those women you knew eleanor roosevelt and marian anderson i asked incredulously
he told me he remembered being a college student in washington when they were there for 
marian anderson's concert historic and he helped bring them around town wow
i called pam munoz ryan to tell her this story and a few days later she told me she wanted to write
a book about marian anderson inspired by my uncle's recollection i was thrilled and so was my uncle
the highlight of my research was a trip to the marian anderson historical society which is located in 
marian anderson's home in south philadelphia blanche burton lyles is the founder and president of the society
as a child she played piano at parties given by marian anderson ms. burton lyles became the first female 
african american pianist to graduate from curtis institute of music and went on to have a celebrated career
as a concert pianist. she also runs a protege program  which helps gifted young african american musicians
and i had the pleasure of meeting one of the proteges soprano lisa marie they sat me down in the living room
blanche took her place at the piano and standing in front of a portrait of marian anderson lisa marie sand
walk with me jesus a spiritual that marian anderson used to sing it was deeply moving

they let me photograph the house and then they took me on a tour of marian anderson's philadelphia from what was
possibly the music school that rejected her because she was black to the church she attended to her birth
home blanche even showed me old wallpaper she had uncovered that might have been in the anderson home i used
that pattern in the picture of marian as a child singing with her family

another major source of visual research was the archives at the metropolitan opera pam and i spent a wonderful day
there along with our editor tracy mack. we went on a backstage tour and spent a few hours in the archives with 
archivist john pennino and in the evening we saw a revival of the very opera in which marian anderson made her
debut un ballo in maschera i returned to the archives several times to continue my research

the old metropolitan opera was torn down in the sixties so i relied on pictures to accurately represent the 
opera house when marian sang the wall of photographs behind giuseppe boghetti in this book is based on a similar wall 
in the met archives in the picture of marian being comforted by her mother the wallpaper behind them is the pattern
of the curtains at the old metropolitan opera a hint of good things to come

i had originally intended to show marian singing at the lincoln memorial from her point of view that is from the stage 
looking out into the crowd but i saw a mural at the department of the interior in washington that was painted 
to commemorate marian's concert an incident in contemporary american life mitchell jamieson and it showed
the concert from the crowd's point of view we are inside the sea of people black and white together and in the 
distance we can just barely see marian i was very touched by this mural and used it as the basis of the far
left hand section of my painting 

my uncle died this year so he won't ever see this book finished. i have since discovered that he was in fact only years
old in the year marian anderson's historic concert. so he could not have actually been there as a college student
perhaps he met marian anderson and eleanor roosevelt at one of marian's return engagements in we'll never know my
uncle always said that stories often get exaggerated as they are retold. he used the yiddish word which means 
grandmother's tale. or tall tale. but this accidental memory of his led to the very book you are now holding
if you look again at the picture of the crowd listening to marian anderson at the lincoln memorial on the left side 
you can see a round faced young man wearing glasses facing you with his eyes closed that's my uncle he finally made it 
to the concert

notable dates in marian anderson's life

born in philadelphia on february
age performs with the union baptist church junior choir
age or chosen for the people's chorus
marian's father john berkley anderson dies at age
age marian postpones entrance to high school to help support her family
age denied entrance to music school enters william penn high school
age transfers to south philadelphia high school
age auditions for giuseppe boghetti
age graduates from high school
age first african american concert artist to record spirituals for a major american recording 
company victor first african american artist to appear as a soloist with the philadelphia 
philharmonic society
sings with the new york philharmonic society receives rave reviews
concert tours in the united states
concert tours in germany scandinavia and the united states
concert tours in france the united states russia and austria sings at salzburg festival
where arturo toscanini is present
sings at carnegie hall in new york city and at the white house for 
president and mrs. roosevelt
lincoln memorial concert receives NAACP's spingarn medal presented by eleanor roosevelt
age marries orpheus fisher and lives in danbury connecticut on property they call 
marianna farm
debuts with the metropolitan opera in un ballo in maschera singing the role of ulrica
appointed as the united nations alternate delegate to the trusteeship council
age performs at the march on washington for jobs and freedom receives the presidential 
medal of freedom two weeks after the death of president kennedy

marian's mother anna anderson dies at age farewell american tour begins at constitution hall
age easter sunday last concert of the farewell tour at carnegie hall
age receives first eleanor roosevelt human rights award
dies in portland oregon at age
centennial tributes to marian anderson at carnegie hall and union baptist church








































